Sunday, January 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the  fatherless; For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause  with thee." (Prov. 23:10-11) "Then thou spakest in vision to thy Holy  One, and saidst, I have laid help on One that is mighty; I have exalted  one chosen out of the people." (Psa. 89:19.) "For there is one God,  and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who  gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim.  2:5,6.) "For he hath made him to be sin for us who knew no sin; that  we might be made the righteousness of God in Him." (2 Cor. 5:21.)  "But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our  iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his  stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have  turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the  iniquity of us all." (Isa. 53:5,6.) "Christ hath redeemed us from the  curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed  is every one that hangeth on a tree." (Gal. 3:13.)  Beloved, this is but a fraction of those blessed passages that glorify our salvation through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ. But I hasten on, asking the dear Lord's supernatural help in throwing Gospel light on the precious doctrine of the exclusive Suretyship of Christ the Son. In a word, Christ became Surety for his ruined, bankrupt kinsman (God's Elect), and, at Calvary, He stepped up like the glorious champion He is, and paid the last thin dime that we owed to outraged justice, for time and eternity.  Beloved, we need to study long and hard on this doctrine until we see it, understand it, and bask in its spiritual comforts. My humble efforts have churned up the following puritan passage some 300+ years old; to wit: "The Covenant of Grace was made with the spiritual Seed in Christ, the Second Adam, taking the burden for them upon himself as their Surety; and without a Surety it could not have been made with them; for they were a company of broken men, owing a thousand times more than they were all worth; and their word in a new bargain for life and salvation was worth nothing; there could be no regard had to it in Heaven. There was neither truth nor ability left them after the first Covenant was broken. Behold their character in point of truth or veracity: ,,Let God be true, but every man a liar. (Rom. 3:4); ,,When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly (Rom. 5:6). The demands in this Covenant were high, and quite above their ability to answer; and, besides, they themselves were false and fickle. They broke their word in the first Covenant, when able to have kept it; how could they be trusted in this new bargain, when their ability was gone? So there was an absolute necessity for a Surety for them in it; and Jesus Christ became Surety for them: so the new Covenant, on which depends all their salvation, was made, and made sure. Our Lord Jesus knew very well the burden he took upon himself in his suretyship for sinners ­ the characters of those whom he became Surety for, and, that he could have no relief from them; but his love to his Father's glory, and the salvation of sinners, engaged him in it, being perfectly sure to smart for it. (Prov. 11:15; to wit: ,,He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it.)"  Thus you see how desperately important it is for us to have help from One that is Mighty to stand by as our Surety to Redeem our souls from Satan's captivity; to wit:  Sunday, January 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  "But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes. And  the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,  patient, In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure  will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; And that they may  recover themselves out of the SNARE OF THE DEVIL, WHO ARE TAKEN CAPTIVE BY  HIM AT HIS WILL." (2 Tim. 2:23-26)  Another profound need for Christ as our Kinsman-Redeemer is to Marry the Widow and Raise Up Seed to the dead kinsman ­ "THAT HIS NAME BE NOT PUT OUT OF ISRAEL." To wit:  "If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her. And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel. And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother. Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her; Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother's house. And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe loosed." (Deut. 25:5-10) The issue here is the vital location of the dead man's name ­ Heaven? or, Hell? That single issue seems to have been high on the list of the Savior's things to think about and talk about and prepare for. One incident in the busy life of the dear Lord Jesus may be dispositive of all. The disciples had just returned from a highly successful preaching trip, and they were particularly happy that even the demons were subject to them; to wit: "And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven (i.e., as though the Lord said, I can tell you the biggest story of all about devils, but none of that stuff is of any importance at all compared to whether or not your names are written in Heaven.) Behold, I give unto you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; BUT RATHER REJOICE, BECAUSE YOUR NAMES ARE WRITTEN IN HEAVEN. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight...And he turned him unto His disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see; For I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them." (Lk. 10:17-24.)  You see, then, what a supremely valuable thing it is for one's Name to be perpetuated in Heaven, and for our mighty Goel (Kinsman-Redeemer) to see to it that the seed of the dead kinsman is typically continued on earth, where it is briefly stated by the Savior's antagonists; to wit:  "The same day came to Him the Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him, saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. Now there were with us seven brethren; and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother; Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. And last of all the woman died also. Therefore in the resurrection whose  Sunday, January 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  wife shall she be of the seven? For they all had her. Jesus answered and said unto  them, ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the  resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. But as touching the resurrection of the dead, HAVE YE NOT READ  THAT WHICH WAS SPOKEN UNTO YOU BY GOD, SAYING, I AM THE GOD OF ABRAHAM, AND THE GOD OF ISAAC, AND THE GOD OF JACOB? GOD IS NOT THE  GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING. And when the multitude heard this, they  were astonished at his doctrine." (Matt. 22:23-33)  And a beautiful illustration of the mighty Goel's duty to Marry the Widow and Raise Up Seed for  the childless husband occurs in Ruth 3:9, where Ruth delicately reminded the rich Boaz that she  was his childless kinswoman; to wit:  "And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and turned himself; and, behold, a woman lay at his feet. And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine handmaid; Spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; FOR THOU ART A NEAR KINSMAN." (Ruth 3:8,9)  Beloved, our nature lay widowed and destitute of the fruits of true holiness by the death of the First Husband ­ Adam ­ and Christ, by His Incarnation, became our Kinsman; and He consented to marry the widow, that he might render our nature fruitful in true holiness, and raise up a seed that no man can number, that should abide forever. Paul evidently alludes to this in 1 Cor. 15:21,22; to wit: "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all Adams seed die, so also in Christ all Christs seed shall be made alive through Him." (1 Cor. 15:21,22.) All who stood in Adam die in him; so all who stand in Christ will be made alive by him. He undertook not for the whole family, but for the seed of Abraham. It also devolved upon the Kinsman-Redeemer to redeem the mortgaged or sold inheritance of his poor kinsman; to wit:  "Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you." (1 Peter 1:2-4)  The law reads thus: "If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any of his kin come," ­ literally, "then shall come in his Goel [Kinsman-Redeemer] that is nearest unto him, and he shall redeem that which his brother sold." (Lev. 25:25). Adam, our father, sold the rich inheritance of moral purity, and of temporal and eternal blessedness, for a taste of the forbidden fruit; and we, his children, waxen still poorer by reason of our own personal transgressions, still further forfeited the inheritance; so that no one, or all together, was in the least able to redeem any part of it; but unless it was redeemed, it is evident no one of us could ever possess it. The Son of God, as Kinsman-Redeemer, freely undertook, in the Covenant, to redeem the lost inheritance, and restore it back to us; and he was the only Being in the universe who could do it: for he alone could pay the price of our forfeited inheritance.  "I, even I, am the Lord; and besides me there is no Saviour." (Isa. 43:11) Thirdly, it was the solemn duty of the Kinsman-Redeemer ­ the Mighty Goel ­ to ransom his poor Kinsman in bondage by paying the price of his Redemption. The law is thus recorded:  "And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family: after that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his  Sunday, January 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  brethren may redeem him... According unto his years shall he give him again the price  of his redemption." (Lev. 25:47,48,52)  We were all sold to a stranger in the loins of our first father, and brought into bondage under the curse of the law; and so we are by nature the law's bondmen, and consequently the slaves of sin and Satan, never to be released without a full ransom price - the infinite debt we were under to the divine law. This ransom price was clearly stipulated in the Covenant of Redemption; i.e., that the Kinsman-Redeemer should give himself a ransom for his poor kinsmen. The law required from us perfect obedience - our supreme service:  "Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things written in the book of the law to do them." (Gal. 3:10)  Christ, as our Kinsman, consented to be born under the law; took on him the form of a servant, and all the claims of the law that were against us; gave his ear to be bored at the law's door-post, ­ (Towit: "And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free; Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever." Ex. 21:5,6.) ­ that we might be delivered from its bondage. Hear what he says: "Think not that I have come to destroy the law: I have not come to destroy, but to fulfill it." (Mat. 5:17)  In due time the law demanded our life; Christ gave his own in lieu of ours. The law required infinite suffering: Christ poured out his own divine soul unto death, and paid the demand by the travailing anguish of his own soul. Never before was such a redemption-price paid. Surely the redemption of the soul is precious, and ceaseth forever; never will another price be offered; this rejected, and all provision for the redemption of the soul forever ceaseth. Finally, it was the solemn duty of the Mighty Goel ­ the Kinsman Redeemer ­ to avenge the blood of the slain kinsman on the slayer.  "But if any man hate his neighbor, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities; then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the AVENGER OF BLOOD, that he may die. Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee." (Deut. 19:11-13) The whole family of Adam lay dead in trespasses and in sin. Satan was the murderer. "He had smitten them to death by an arrow shot through the eye," says an old preacher. But there was no one able to perform the part of a near kinsman until the Second Adam, in this, the Second Covenant, volunteered to avenge their blood. "Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who through fear of death were all their life-time subject to bondage." (Heb. 2:14,15.) Samson was, in this respect, a striking type of Christ; for he avenged his people upon the Philistines, their oppressors, pulling down their own temple upon their heads, and dying himself, that he might effect their destruction and His peoples' redemption.  "The Earth Again A Heaven. O! Golden here-after. Thine ever-bright rafter, will shake in the thunder of sanctified song, and every swift angel proclaim an evangel to summon God's saints to the glorified throng. O! Host without number, awaked from death slumber, who walk in white robes on the emerald shore; the glory is o'er you, the throne is before you, and weeping will come in your spirits no more."  I love you. Amen.  
