Sunday, October 23, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch; and Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years; and he died. And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah; AND ENOCH WALKED WITH GOD after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters; and all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years; AND ENOCH WALKED WITH GOD; AND HE WAS NOT; FOR GOD TOOK HIM." Gen. 5:18-24.  Here you see, Beloved, from the rapture of Enoch ­ supplemented by reliable traditions of the Jews ­ that mankind has taken giant strides toward the great apostacy that culminated in the Flood of Noah. After the murder of Abel by his brother Cain: "And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth; for God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel whom Cain slew. And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord." (Gen. 4:25,26)  Some chose to translate the last sentence above, as follows; to wit: "Then began men to call upon God in the name of the Messiah" (you see, now that Seth had been born and the righteous line of Abel could continue to the promised Messiah). This was very, very important to the sincere Jewish expositors, and particularly R. Maimonides, who observes that all the sons of Adam before Seth were rather beasts than men, and had not the true human form, not the form and image of men; but Seth, after Adam had taught and instructed him, was in human perfection.  In any case, there was a radical separation of God's righteous seed from Satan's demon-possessed sons of Belial ­ just as it is in one way or another in this and every generation of mankind on earth; pursuant to the purifying principle as laid out by the apostle at 2nd Cor. 6:17,18; to wit:  "Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." (2 Cor. 6:17,18)  This would be a good time to straighten out everybody in the world ­ and especially every Arminian heretic preacher running around spouting the lie that mankind is made in the image and likeness of God. Fags love that universal lie. Fags love to say that since God made them like they are, it must be all right. God don't make no junk. Fags are smart, they know that such bumpersticker theology and cheap, gotcha argumentation is not worth a dime. They teach such meaningless jargon-laden nonsense in classes. It is simply not true that man today is made by God in God's own image and likeness. Any preacher making such a wild claim is too dangerously dumb to be a preacher, or he is too evil to be an intelligent preacher, using his forensic debating skills and sophistry to mislead and deceive the masses to their doom. Beloved, these false prophets know better than they pretend, and the whole world swarms with hundreds of thousands of these phony, lying preachers, priests, professors of religion, rabbis, Imams, and leaders of religion of every kind ­ all asserting that man today is made in the image and likeness of God. It is true that Adam was made in the image and likeness of God. But Adam grievously rebelled and sinned against God in the Garden of Eden, whereby Adam completely lost the image and likeness of God, forever; and could not therefore pass it on to his posterity, or convey it away by any means.  All subsequent Adamic conveyances pass burdened by Adam's debilities. Wherefore, we read as follows; to-wit: "This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son (Seth) in HIS own likeness, after HIS image; and called his name  Sunday, October 23, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  Seth (Note here, briefly put, Adam was created in God's image and likeness; after the Fall of Adam  into sin, Adam had only sin and degradation to pass on to Adam's posterity.); And the days of  Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years; and he begat sons and daughters. And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years; and he died." Gen. 5:1-5.  GILL: "Not in the likeness, and after the image of God, in which Adam was created; for having sinned, he lost that image, at least it was greatly defaced, and he came short of that glory of God, and could not convey it to his posterity; who are, and ever have been, conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity; are polluted and unclean, foolish and disobedient; averse to all that is good, and prone to all that is evil; the sinfulness of nature is conveyed by natural generation, but not holiness and grace; that is not of blood; nor of the will of man, nor of the flesh, but of God, and produced of his own will, by his mighty power, impressing the image of his Son in regeneration on his people; which by beholding his glory they are more and more changed into by the Spirit of God. The Jewish writers understand this in a good sense, of Seth being like to Adam in goodness, when Cain was not; so the Targum of Jonathan, ,,and he begat Seth, who was like to his image and similitude; for before Eve had brought forth Cain, who was not like unto him ­ but afterwards she brought forth him who was like unto him, and called his name Seth. So they say, Cain was not of the seed, nor of the image of Adam, nor his works like Abel his brother; but Seth was of the seed and image of Adam, and his works were like the works of his brother Abel; according to that verse, `he begat a son in his own likeness.'" And so, Beloved, the matter is reduced to utmost simplicity; to wit: In Gen. 1:26,27 God created Adam in God's own image and likeness; to wit:  "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness... So God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He him; male and female created He them." (Gen. 1:26,27)  (And what a magnificent creature he was, in every respect ­ beautiful and brilliant and powerful ­ body, soul, and spirit. Even after the Fall, man routinely lived nearly 1,000 years. In his pristine condition, set to live for an indefinite number of years in a powerful body, much like our own resurrection bodies shall be ­ and blessed of God. And, O, Beloved, look at mankind's bodies and minds now. Decrepit and teetering toward the grave, and scarcely able to make it to 100 years of age.)  NO (!) Mr. Hypocrite! You are not made in the image and likeness of God; and one look at your miserable carcase in the mirror should silence such ignorant arrogance forever! Common sense should inform your modicum of Bible knowledge, especially at such passages as Rom. 5:12, et seq.; to wit: "Wherefore, as by one man (Adam) sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. ...There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death." Rom. 5:12;8:1,2. "So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy; The second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly." (1 Cor. 15:42-49)  Sunday, October 23, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  (Note. Beloved, Paul is here waxing gloriously eloquent, and at the same time eloquently glorious ­  as only those then and there who are filled with the Holy Spirit can do. It is a message directly from  our Father to His church. We are here dealing with supernatural things.)  "Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." (1 Cor. 15:50-58)  Enoch, the seventh from Adam, had a good and godly father whose name was Jared, who lived 962 years, and whose righteous life doubtlessly had a powerful influence over his son Enoch of walking with God and being taken up by God in a rapture. To wit: "And all the days of Jared were 962 years; and he died. The name of this patriarch (Jared) signifies DESCENDING; and, the ancient Arabic writers say that he had his name from the posterity of Seth, descending from the holy mountain in his time; for a noise being heard on the mountain, about 100 men went down to the sons of Cain, contrary to the prohibition and dehortation of Jared (dehortation means to strongly warn about and preach against a sinful thing), and mixed themselves with the evil daughters of Cain, which brought on the apostacy; when Jared was near his end, he called to him Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, Noah, and their children, and said unto them, Ye know what some have done, that they have gone down from the mountain, and have had conversation with the daughters of Cain, and have defiled themselves; Take you care of your purity, and dont descend from the holy mountain; after which he blessed them, and having appointed Enoch his successor, he died. And Enoch lived 165 years, and begat Methuselah; and Enoch being a prophet gave him this name under a spirit of prophecy, FORETELLING BY IT WHEN THE FLOOD SHOULD BE; FOR HIS NAME SIGNIFIES ,,WHEN HE DIES THERE SHALL BE AN EMISSION, OR SENDING FORTH OF WATERS UPON THE EARTH, TO DESTROY IT."  Beloved, you have probably heard the old saying that this or that person is as old as Methuselah; and it is true that he was probably the oldest man who ever lived, 969 years, see Gen. 5:27. But Methuselah had a much greater claim to fame; every one of the days of his 969 years of life on this earth, he was a walking testimony of the forthcoming wrath of God.  Beginning with the first intelligible utterances of the childhood of little baby boy Methuselah ­ right on through to really, really old age; to wit: Listen up, you filthy, ungodly sinners. You better hope and pray that I live a long, long time. You better not bomb me, torch me, beat me, or hurt me in any way. Because, when I die, God will send a universal Flood and destroy you all. Methuselah is my name; and warning sinners to flee from the wrath to come is my game.  Sunday, October 23, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  How proud his father Enoch must have been of his son Methuselah; and vice versa. High exciting must those antedeluvial days must have been, with the worldwide apostacy waxing worse and worse, and the run-up to the Flood manifesting itself clearer and clearer.  And it seems to me, Beloved, that these things which we see happening all about us every day are very much like those fearful days of long ago ­ institutionalized mocking and scoffing, and institutionalized, willing ignorance; to wit:  "This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance; that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Savior; knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of His coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. FOR THIS THEY WILLINGLY ARE IGNORANT OF, THAT BY THE WORD OF GOD THE HEAVENS WERE OF OLD, AND THE EARTH STANDING OUT OF THE WATER AND IN THE WATER; WHEREBY THE WORLD THAT THEN WAS, BEING OVERFLOWED WITH WATER, PERISHED. But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, RESERVED UNTO FIRE AGAINST THE DAY OF JUDGMENT AND PERDITION OF UNGODLY MEN." (2 Pet. 3:1-7) Beloved, we are in such good company ! I love to read what these blessed men have written and said. Just a few words tells worlds about them, their words, and themselves. Bro. Enoch is a beautiful example. We studied briefly about him from the Old Testament. Now let us consider a little from the New; to wit: "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God. But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligent seek him." (Heb. 11:5,6) Beloved, we must ­ i.e., each one of us a member of Westboro Baptist Church ­ each one of us must aspire to please God and walk with God. It means at least this: That he walked in the name and fear of God, according to His will, in all His commandments, ordinances, and requirements then made known; he walked by faith in the promises of God, and in the view of the Messiah, the promised Seed; he walked uprightly and sincerely, as in the sight of God; he had familiar converse, and near and intimate communion with Him; such that even the Heathen world knew of him, admired him, and wrote of him. One of them, Eupolemus, gave this remarkable account of Enoch's walkings with God and communion with Him; to wit: "Enoch knew all things by the angels;" denoting an intimacy with the angels, and that he received messages from the Lord by them. But, Beloved, SO DO WE (!) See, Heb. 1:13,14; to wit: "But to which of the angels (Michael? Gabriel?) said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:13,14) Beloved, THAT'S US (!) The mighty angels of God are with us at every hour of the day and night ­ to help us at every level of life and every turn of the road. They love us. They attended our birth. They will bear us to Abraham's bosom.  I love you; Amen.  
