Sunday, July 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Mankind is not a little sick ­ he is totally depraved. He is not merely spiritually sick ­ he is  totally dead in trespasses and sin, and under the total dominion of sin. Whatever is intended by  this phrase, it is true of all those who are under the law. Rom. 6:14; to wit:  "For sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not  under the law, but under grace. What then? Shall we sin,  because we are not under the law, but under grace? God  forbid. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey; whether  of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? But  God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was  delivered you. Being then made free from sin, ye became the  servants of righteousness." (Rom. 6:14-18.)  Hence we must conclude that the tyranny of sin is of universal extent, for all mankind, for all men are in subjection to the law, considered as the descendants of Adam. The phrase necessarily supposes that sin has possession of the soul; for the mind certainly is the subject of that, under whose direction and influence it acts, whether it be a good or evil principle. Besides, it evidently suggests that the mind is in subjection to evil, as a governing principle, in which determines it in all its volitions and acts. This rule of sin is not a force upon the mind, to which it makes opposition, for the soul is a subject, and not a captive to evil. It cannot but will evil! Through the reign of sin; yet, its evil volitions are spontaneous and free.  The dominion of sin consists in its determining influence upon the will. And this sway over the mind it keeps, until victorious grace makes a conquest upon the soul, by the implantation of a contrary principle, e.g., the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ (which opposes the influence of sin, and disposes the will to contrary acts) let conscience remonstrate ever so sharply against the fatal choice sin inclines the will to make. But, be sure, sin is always at work ­ inspired by the devil and his devices, which he and his demon troops have had centuries to hone. And, totally depraved mankind, in their unregenerated state, will lend unlimited support and cooperation; to wit: "Because the carnal mind (i.e., the unregenerated mind) is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God." (Rom. 8:78.) No how; no way. Can a man who has never been born again ­ can such a man ever please God? At any time? In any way? A resounding, NO. (!)  Beloved, right here is a glorious touch-stone of Christian doctrine. Wrestle with this concept until you see it clearly, and nobody can trip you up. "So then they that are in the flesh (i.e., unregenerated, or born again, or true believers, or, etc.) CANNOT PLEASE GOD." (Rom. 8:8.) Unless you are one of God's little sheep, with His Spirit bearing witness with your spirit, it will be impossible for you to do anything that will please God. Don't you get it yet? You are dead in trespasses and sin. Your father is his majesty the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.  Sunday, July 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  In fact, Jesus spoke those very words upon one occasion when He debated with a group of  hostile Jews; to wit:  "Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father; ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but He sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? Even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, (Cain killed Abel over some religious words he did not like), and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not." (John 8:42-45)  This one proclamation by Christ, standing alone, ought to establish the doctrine of Total Depravity; to wit: "YE ARE OF YOUR FATHER THE DEVIL." (Jn. 8:44)  Like father, like son. The Savior is at least saying that the involuntary attributes of the parents are shared by the children ­ more or less. "And the lusts of your father ye will do." (Jn. 8:44.) This also extends to physical features and moral qualities for the most part. Especially as applied by the Savior; to wit: "He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him." (Jn. 8:44)  And now let us make full, free, fair application, to wit: Whenever any son or daughter of Adam thinks, speaks, or acts ­ sin lieth at the door, and sin is heavily in the mix. Because the blood of Adam flows in his/her veins; and will so flow unless and until the precious blood of Jesus Christ washes it away; to wit: "That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His son cleanseth us from all sin." (1 Jn. 1:3-7)  You see from the passage just quoted that truth is the touch-stone, otherwise known as walking in the light, and is the prerequisite of all true Christian fellowship. Only Satan's lies even suggest otherwise! The apostles of Satan have taken over every facet of human activity by and through organized sodomite activists. An example is the takeover of the churches by militant fags, for the most part ordained ministers. Thousands of those who occupy our modern pulpits are no longer engaged or interested in preaching the old-time Gospel, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, or rightly dividing the word of truth. (2 Tim. 2:15.)  Instead of magnifying the enormity of sin, and setting forth its eternal consequences, they minimize it by declaring that sin is merely ignorance or the absence of good. Instead of warning their hearers to flee from the wrath to come, they make God a liar by declaring that he is too loving and merciful to send any of His creatures to eternal torment.  Sunday, July 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  Instead of declaring that without shedding of blood there is no remission, they merely hold up Christ as the Great Exemplar and exhort their hearers to Follow in His Steps. Of these hereticks it must be said: "For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God." (Rom. 10:3)  Of these hereticks, we have no patience, and declare plainly: "For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves (imitating) into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing (not to be wondered at) if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works." (2 Cor. 11:13-15)  In addition to the fact that today thousands of churches are without a leader who faithfully declares the whole counsel of God and presents HIS way of salvation, we also have to face the additional fact that the vast majority of people in these churches are very unlikely to learn the Truth for themselves. The family altar, where a portion of God's Word used to be read daily, is now largely a thing of the past, even in so-called Christian homes. The Bible is not expounded in the pulpit, and it is not read in the pew.  The demands of this hurry, hurry age are so numerous that the multitudes have little time ­ and still less real interest ­ in the things of God. Hence the majority who are too indolent to search for themselves, are left to the mercy of those whom they pay to search for them; most of whom betray their trust by studying and expounding economic and social problems rather than the Oracles of God. Ergo:  "What advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? Much every way; chiefly, because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God." (Rom. 3:1,2) "If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God..." (1 Pet. 4:11) "Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec. Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe. But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil." (Heb. 5:10-14) "This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers; who received the lively Oracles to give unto us; to whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt, saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us; for as for this Moses, which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands." (Acts 7:38-41)  Sunday, July 8, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock; be not silent to me; lest, if thou be silent to  me, I become like them that go down unto the pit (i.e., reprobates, non-elect,  predestinated to Hell). Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee,  when I lift up my hands toward thy holy Oracle. Draw me not away with the  wicked, and with the workers of iniquity (Note: workers of iniquity is an expression  meaning the same as non-elect, referring to those who are predestinated to live in  sin while they live on earth, and go straight to Hell when they die.) Which speak  peace to their neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts. Give them according to  their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their endeavors; give them after  the work of their hands; render to them their desert. (Imprecatory prayers, with a  vengeance.) Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of  His hands, He shall destroy them, and not build them up. Blessed be the Lord,  because he hath heard the voice of my supplications. The Lord is my strength and  my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped; therefore my heart greatly  rejoiceth; and with my song will I praise him." (Psa. 28:1-7)  In Prov. 14:12 we read, "There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death." This "way" which ends in "death" is the Devil's Delusion - the gospel of Satan - a way of salvation by human attainment. It is a way which "seemeth right," that is to say, it is presented in such plausible language that it appeals to the natural man; it is set forth in such a subtle and attractive manner, that it commends itself to the intelligence of its hearers. By virtue of the fact that it appropriates to itself religious terminology, sometimes appeals to the Bible for its support (whenever it suits its purpose), holds up before men lofty ideals, and is proclaimed by those who have graduated from our Theological institutions, countless multitudes are decoyed and deceived by it. Beloved, we are dealing here with the devil's clever fiendish counterfeits. And, we are not ignorant of his devices, as it is written: "Lest Satan should get an advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices." (2 Cor. 2:11)  The success of any counterfeit operation depends in large part on how closely the counterfeit resembles the genuine article. Ergo, Heresy is not so much total denial of the truth, as it is a perversion of it. Thus you hear many a theological jackass talking about being a 4-point Calvinist. That is why half a lie is far more dangerous than a complete repudiation of the Truth.  Hence, when the father of lies enters the pulpit, it is not his custom to flatly deny the fundamental doctrines of Christianity. Rather does he tacitly acknowledge and formally confess them ­ and then proceed to give an erroneous interpretation, and false application. For example, he would not be so foolish (except for Nate) as to boldly announce his disbelief in a personal God; he takes His existence for granted; and then gives a false description of His character, and lies about the 5-Points of Calvinism; to wit: He falsely announces that God is the spiritual father of all mankind, when the Scriptures plainly tell us that "we are the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ." (Gal. 3:26.)  Further, he declares that God is far too merciful to ever send any of mankind to Hell to suffer eternal fire and brimstone; when God Himself has said: "Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:15) I love you. Amen.  
