Sunday, March 4, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka is an Old School or Primitive Baptist Church. It has existed in this evil place for fifty-seven years, filling up that which is yet unfulfilled of the afflictions of Christ by virtue of the job assigned to us by God Himself, to fulfill the word of God for the sake of those to whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of the mystery which has been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to God's elect who are alive in the  Earth; and in this place also, warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom. And in this cause, we labor striving according to God's working which worketh in us mightily. Col. 1:24-29.  "Warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom." Col. 1:28.  There are some places on Earth in every age and generation that are particularly evil, and hence called, the place where Satan's seat is, and where the synagogue, or church of Satan, is located, in that particular age or generation. Rev. 2:13 and 3:9. Such places are spiritually called "Sodom." Rev. 11:8. There is considerable evidence that Topeka, Kansas is the most evil place on Earth in this day and in this generation.  In the Nov. 30, 1987 issue of the Kansas City Star, there is a story on page 5-A with the headline across four columns reading "Kansas once respected, now ridiculed." The story is about a book on Kansas to be published the spring of 1988 by a University of Kansas professor named Robert Bader. The thesis of the book is that Kansas is the laughingstock of the nation and the world: "Once respected, Kansas, during the last 50 years or so, has been reduced to joke fodder." Thus University of Kansas professor Bader says, "Since the 1920s, the image of Kansas has fallen from respectability to ridicule." He says, "The standing image of Kansas is Elmer Gantry," a caricature of a Kansas preacher created by Sinclair Lewis. Bader says, "Elmer Gantry was a Kansan; this was not accidental. Lewis made it perfectly clear that Elmer was an amoral, duplicitous boob who never drew an honest breath in his life."  Prof. Bader is correct on that point; such is also my own testimony, having lived and labored in this evil place now for more than one-half of a century, and having reared thirteen children here, putting them for the most part through college and law school in this place, and with all of the societal dynamics and human interactions necessarily entailed in such a lifetime of activity. I sadly agree with Prof. Bader on that point. To my knowledge, most modern day Kansans, with very few and rare exceptions, are indeed amoral hypocrites (amoral means "without morals"), duplicitous idolaters (duplicitous means "deceitful, treacherous liars") who never drew an honest, decent breath in their godforsaken lives. And worse, far worse, than even Prof. Bader's description of Kansans, is that of the Lord Jesus Christ found in Matt. Chapters 10 and 11, Mk. Chapter 6, and Lk. Chapter 10. Listen: "And thou, Capernaum,"--Topeka, Wichita, Kansas City--"which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." Matt. 11:23-24.  In my opinion; and I am certainly competent to have and express an opinion, I am certainly qualified as an expert on this subject; and being a student of history and the Bible for more than sixty-five years, and being a continuous active citizen and resident of this evil place for more than  Sunday, March 4, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  one-half of a century; Topeka and Kansas have sinned against more light than the ancient city-states  of Sodom and Gomorrah. Listen:  "And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city." (Mk. 6:11)  It is my solemn intention when I leave this place, either at death or at the return of the Lord Jesus Christ for his own, to do just as that verse says: to shake off the dust under my feet. American dust, Kansas dust, Topeka dust; for a testimony against the evil, Christ-rejecting citizens and inhabitants of this place. Institutionalized evil characterizes this generation. The governmental offices at every level, the educational institutions at every level, the churches at every place and at every level, are dominated by sodomites, idolaters, fornicators, hypocrites, and morally depraved people of the worst kind. And this, virtually, without exception.  John Gill of London, England, in expounding Deuteronomy 32:32, more than two hundred years ago: "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah" (Deut. 32:32), described the sins of such a place as follows: "particularly for pride, luxury, idleness, idolatry, profaneness, contempt of serious religion, and for bodily uncleanness; even for that sin which has its name from Sodom, ... and [where sodomites are] sheltered under public authority."  Pride, hypocrisy, idolatry, and contempt of serious religion and bodily uncleanness; that description, my friend, fits this generation to a "T". And it is the solemn duty of every minister claiming to speak for God to man, "to warn every man and teaching every man in all wisdom." Col. 1:28. That is, to intelligently assess the true spiritual condition of those among whom he lives; perform an assay of the situation; and then, predicated upon that assessment and that assay, to boldly warn and teach every man in light of that condition. That is, "in all wisdom." Listen: "Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand." (Eze. 3:17-18)  My primary text for today is Deut. 32:32. You should mark that down: Deut. 32:32-33: "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter: Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps." (Deut. 32:32-33) This is a powerful figurative indictment of a people. The metaphors are very strong: the vine of Sodom, the fields of Gomorrah, grapes of gall, and wine which is the poison of dragons and the venom of asps. That is, exceedingly poisonous snakes whose bite is fatal. This is nothing other than a Bible description of false religious systems made up of reprobate hypocrites and idolaters and supported by human government in the hands of sodomites, adulterers, and effeminate perverts. And, all of it stands in contrast to the true Church of the Lord Jesus made up of his elect, who shine as lights of truth and righteousness in the midst of an adulterous and sinful generation. Matt. 16:4.  Their vine is as the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah. By contrast, says Christ, "I am the true vine." John 15:1. And, "the vineyard of the LORD of hosts" is the true Church, "his pleasant plant." Isa. 5:7. The vital and spiritual union between Christ and His Church is indivisible  Sunday, March 4, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  and indissoluble. Hence he says: "I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I  in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit"--good fruit. John 15:5.  Thus, in a metaphor, the true Church and people of God in the earth at any given time, are symbolized by the true vine and the vineyard. And the message, and work, and labors of that true Church and its people constitute the fruit, the grapes, the wine of that vineyard; and it's good. And, in sharp contrast, false religious systems, Anti-Christ and his people in the earth, are said to be the vine of Sodom, growing in the fields of Gomorrah; producing bitter grapes and poison wine: Their grapes are grapes of gall, and their wine is the poison of snakes. That is, the false doctrines and loose morals of false religious systems doom and damn the members of it. They are all sodomites, adulterers, fornicators, perverts, and idolaters.  Thus, "their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah." Deut. 32:32. And, the sodomites and women preachers and Christmas celebrators; steeped in idolatry and spiritual abomination that make up the population of this generation; are drunk on poison wine made from the grapes of bitterness from the vineyards of Sodom and Gomorrah. And, in other words, the population of this evil and godforsaken generation consist almost entirely of spiritual and moral reprobates and perverts. And, the incontrovertible evidence which proves my case for it is seen in the fact that homosexuals and fornicators dominate the churches and the governmental offices of this world. And, the additional fact that, to the number, the inhabitants of this generation worship and serve the false gods of Santa Claus, Christmas trees, and other Christmas rituals in the mindless and frenzied celebration of that pagan, heathen and idolatrous institution known as the Mass of Christ or Christmas. And, if any man dares to even raise intelligent questions about the Christmas orgy of buying and giving and wassailing, feasting, carousing, drunkenness and all the rest of it, he takes his life in his hands.  Judging from the irate, irrational, hysterical calls coming to me nowadays from the Christmas idolaters around the world, the sign hanging over every door of every church celebrating Christmas must surely be: "Check your brains at the door, all ye who enter here." Your goofy Christmas religion is mindless and irrational in the extreme. Those who adhere to the truth of God in the earth are ready always to give an intelligent answer to every man that asketh of them a reason, that is a rational basis, a thorough explanation grounded in reason, for the hope that is in them. 1 Pet. 3:15. But you Christmas freaks, you heathen idolaters, you sodomites, and you fornicators, who control the churches and the government in this world, have no rational explanation for the religious doctrines and practices you profess to believe in. Therefore, you are unable to respond intelligently to the issues raised by our preaching, and are reduced to making anonymous phone calls to lodge mindless objections to the message of Westboro Baptist Church. The motto of your sodomite Christmas idolatry, which is the very essence of your religion, ought to be: "Check your brains at the door." A large so-called church, for example, right here in Topeka, ran a huge ad in the Capital Journal exhorting one and all to come do four things with them: Celebrate Christmas, celebrate a festival of lights, have a candlelight service, and have a wassail bowl party. Where, in God's name, did you get such terminology? And, you claim to believe and practice the Bible from cover to cover. You blind hypocrites. Listen to your idolatrous mouth as those four pagan, heathen, idolatrous concepts and expressions drip from your lying lips. Listen to yourself! I challenge you to find any one of those expressions, either the terminology or the practice, in the word of God. You got those things from ancient Babylon and Rome; not from the pure word of God. And you did it in bold defiance of the revealed will and word of God Almighty.  I love you. Amen.  
