Sunday, March 18, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts (i.e., blood offering): and by it he being dead yet speaketh." (Heb. 11:1-4.)  NOTE: God does not require blood sacrifice of us, else would we give it; but He requires praise and thanksgiving, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name; to wit: "By Him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name" (Heb. 13:15.) And, as a general proposition, it is hard to improve upon Owen's comment on this place; to wit: "The work of faith in all ages of the church, as unto its nature, efficacy, and method of its actings, is uniform and the same. They had not of old a faith of one kind, and we of another. This in general is the design of the apostle to prove in this whole chapter. It hath been varied in its degrees of light by outward revelations, but in itself from first to last it is still the same." E.g., "By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months by his parents, because they saw he was a proper child, and they were not afraid of the king's commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, REFUSED to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; CHOOSING rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the reproach of Christ (!) Yes the reproach of Christ (!) Greater riches than the treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward." (Heb. 11:23-26.)  "But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." (Heb. 11:6) On its face, verse 23 could be read as giving false support to the Arminian heretics who promote the lying doctrine of infant baptism; to wit: "By faith Moses," i.e., the saving faith of the infant Moses. Whereas, clearly, the passage identifies Moses' parents as those who are there exercising saving faith for the baby Moses and for themselves; to wit:  "By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king's commandment." (Heb. 11:23) Comes now Josephus and weighs in, as they say, on this interesting subject. Meanwhile millions of babies are "baptized" at Roman Catholic and other heretical Arminian fonts around the world, from then till now ­ giving false and deadly hope. "Josephus, giving an account of the nativity of Moses, tells us that Amram his father had a revelation from God, or a divine oracle, that of him and his wife Jochebed he should proceed and be born by whom the people should be delivered out of bondage. And that hereon, seeing the eminent beauty of this child when it was born, he and his wife used the utmost of their industry, with the venture of their lives, for his preservation; for they firmly believed that the divine oracle should be accomplished. And because it is said that they hid him by faith, some expositors do judge that in their faith they had respect unto immediate divine revelation. But we shall see that they had a sufficient ground of faith for what they did, without any such immediate revelation, which is not necessary unto the exercise of faith on all occasions."  Beloved, this is a very important and comforting principle for us. Generally, it means that we do not always need fireworks and rockets going on all around us to give us assurance that God is with us. Sometimes (and maybe most often) our Father speaks to us in a still small voice. Remember the truly amazing experience of the prophet Elijah as he fled from the murderous queen Jezebel who had sworn to take his life. Elijah, miraculously, had not had a bite to eat or a drop to drink for forty days and forty nights, as he fled for his life from Jezebel's posse. (1 Kgs. 19:8.)  Sunday, March 18, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  Remember also, Beloved, that Elijah was held forth by the apostle James as an example for us as an example of how we ought to pray, saying, "Elijah was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly." (James 5:17.) "And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and  withal how he had slain all the prophets (450!) with the sword. Then Jezebel sent a messenger  unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of  one of them by to morrow about this time. AND WHEN HE SAW THAT, HE AROSE, AND  WENT FOR HIS LIFE, and came to Beersheba (the southern-most tip of all Israel) which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. But he himself went a day's journey into the  wilderness, (a desperate man fleeing for his very life), and came and sat down under a juniper  tree; and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take  away my life; for I am not better than my fathers. And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree,  behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat. And he looked. And,  behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and  drink, and laid him down again. And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and  touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee. And he arose, and  did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb  the mount of God. And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of  the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have  been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken thy  covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am  left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount  before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, AND A GREAT AND STRONG WIND RENT  THE MOUNTAINS, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the  wind; and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake; and after the  earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire; and after the fire a still, small voice. And it  was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood at  the entering in of the cave, And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou  here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts; because the  children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and have slain thy  prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away." (1  Kings 19:1-14.)  Beloved, we must be very slow to criticize Elijah in any way with regard to any aspect of his conduct before, during or after his amazing meeting with God and the elect angels atop mount Horeb, the holy mount of God where Moses spent forty days and received the Pentateuch.  "O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderness. Selah. The earth shook, the heavens dropped at the presence of God; even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel." (Psa. 68:7,8.)  And he said, go forth and stand upon the mount before the Lord, who would appear there as he had to Moses formerly, though not in the same manner; and, behold, the Lord passed by, or was about to pass, with His messengers going before Him. First, a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord, strong enough to do all this, and so it might; but we read that the Lord was not in the whirlwind, as He sometimes is; to wit:  "God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth, and is furious; the Lord will take vengeance on His adversaries, and He reserveth wrath for His enemies. The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked; THE LORD HATH HIS WAY IN THE WHIRLWIND and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of His feet." (Nahum 1:2-3)  Sunday, March 18, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  Remember also that the Lord spoke to Job out of a whirlwind, and speaks to and deals with His elect just as He pleases at all times; to wit: "Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said, Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?" (Job 38:1,2.) And  after the wind an earthquake, that shook the earth all around, and the mountain also, as it did when  the Law was given on it at the time of Moses; to wit:  "And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount. And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount; and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up." (Exod. 19:16-20.)  But we are told that the Lord was not in the earthquake, and after the earthquake, a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire, either. The Targum and R. Jarchi interpret all these appearances of angels: the wind, of an host of angels of wind; the earthquake, of an host of angels of commotion; the fire, of an host of angels of fire; (Psa. 104:4.) to wit: "Who maketh his angels spirits; His ministers a flaming fire." All these ministers of the Lord went before Him, to prepare the way of His glorious Majesty; which emblems may represent the Power of God, the terribleness of His majesty, and the fury of His wrath, which He could display, if He wills, to the destruction of His enemies (i.e., all the non-Elect peoples, or, the Reprobates of mankind in every generation); and could just as easily destroy the United States of America as the wind rent the mountains, and broke the rocks, and the earthquake shook the earth, and the fire consumed all in its way. It is for this reason ­ following the example of Elijah, God's number one prophet, that Westboro Baptist Church preaches to the United States and the world; that every deadly whirlwind is a warning from God Almighty that same-sex marriage may harbinge your doom; to wit:  "The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God." (Psa. 9:17) Likewise, every killer earthquake is a certain warning from our Father ­ which we at Westboro Baptist Church have a duty to proclaim to America and to the world ­ that it is just as easy for God Almighty to annihilate you, as it was for God to shake and pulverize the mountains where Elijah was hiding from Jezebel. And, likewise, every killer fire that hits the news ­ like the fire kindled by a distraught father in California ­ that reduced his two little boys to ashes ­ I say, every such incident is a cry to us to spring into action, and to warn that it is too late for you sons of Belial to repent; that you have turned the United States and the world over to the militant sodomites. God has called us to preach that which we have seen and heard. As it was in the days of Noah, when it was too late for all but Noah and his family; to wit: "By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith." (Heb. 11:7.) Beloved, there stands Elijah, meeting with God on the sacred mount where Moses also met with God, soon thereafter to be taken to Heaven alive like Enoch.  "And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven" (2 Kgs. 2:11)  The next time we see Elijah on a high mountain in Scripture, he is shining in his glorified body with Moses and the Lord Jesus Christ. (Matt. 17:1-3.) I love you. Amen.  
