Sunday, August 7, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah  king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord,  saying..." Jer. 36:1.  (which was about 17 years before the final and total destruction of the Kingdom of the Jews, often called the Babylonian Captivity). It was certainly the last of the last days for the Jewish nation, much as these days we are living and preaching in are the last of the last days before the Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory, aka, The Great and Dreadful Final Judgment Day, aka, The End of the World. Beloved, for those who truly, and intelligently, and sincerely believe such things, would they not color and influence their thoughts ­ in some version of this advice of Peter; to wit: "But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, WHAT MANNER OF PERSONS OUGHT YE TO BE IN ALL HOLY CONVERSATION AND GODLINESS, looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. ...But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen." (2 Pet. 3:10-18)  Furthermore, those passages of Scripture dealing with eschatological (i.e., end-time things) events will be poured over and studied more and more as the end of all things draws nearer. Look closer again at Jer. 36:1; to wit: the historical event took place within a very few years (c.15 yrs.); and the event was none other than the bloody sacking of Jerusalem by mighty Nebuchadnezzar's Babylonian siegetechnique, no-prisoner warfare. The prophet Jeremiah with his doom's day sermonizing was treated shamefully ­ especially by the young punk king Jehoiakim son of Josiah. The word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, a vital message for those people, for those specific times, saying, "Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein ALL THE WORDS THAT I HAVE SPOKEN UNTO THEE AGAINST ISRAEL, AND AGAINST JUDAH, AND AGAINST ALL THE NATIONS, FROM THE DAY I SPAKE UNTO THEE, FROM THE DAYS OF JOSIAH, EVEN UNTO THIS DAY." Jer. 36:2. This teaches us, that what is needed most ­ especially when and where God's wrath is imminent ­ is a cram session reading and digesting all the pure words of God. It may be that such blessed words were brushed aside as of little worth in days gone by when they were first published and the sun was shining and things were going well. But now the storm clouds of God's wrath are forming, dark and menacing. Write God's Words in a book ­ all you can get your hands on. Read them over and over. Why else should you write them and read them? Here's why, as provided in the next verse, by God Himself; to wit: "It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way; THAT I MAY FORGIVE THEIR INIQUITY AND THEIR SIN." (Jer. 36:3)  That is certainly the general principle ordinarily employed in dealing with God, as articulated by Isaiah; to wit: "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near; Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the  Sunday, August 7, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth and  maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; So shall my  word be that goeth forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." Isa. 55:6-11.  Now, Beloved, no more glowing, accurate, and worthy tribute was ever written extolling the virtues of God's Holy Word. Nevertheless, then as now, the masses of the people chose to ignore that blessed Word, were angered by it when it was delivered by the prophets, and, to add insult to injury, imprisoned those faithful prophets and/or connived by legal or illegal means to "shut up" the mouths which were uttering those Holy Words. And, so much the more as they see the Day of the Lord fast approaching: "Because He hath appointed a Day, in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom He hath ordained; whereof He hath given assurance unto all men, in that He hath raised Him from the dead. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them. Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed; among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them." (Acts 17:31-34)  This wonderful experience that Paul had on Mars Hill in Athens, Greece, shows the usual responses. But when rank apostasy has deprived a society of all but a few evangelists of weight ­ "Watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry." (2 Tim. 4:5.) ­ I say, when Satan has virtually seized control of any state or nation, such that it has become literally, physically violent and dangerous for the righteous to dwell there ­ or anywhere, for that matter ­ Scripture warrants us in the firm belief that the end is near. See how furious are the threats and the warnings of the prophets have become; for great is the anger and fury that the Lord has pronounced against his people; a very sore judgment; no less than the utter destruction of their city, temple, and nation. At such a time, the sermons of the Lord's messengers are also wont to be exceeding kind and most encouraging to the Elect ­ even extravagantly so; e.g., to wit: "The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. Against whom do ye sport yourselves? Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks." (Isa. 57:1-5) And, what could be more comforting, exceeding kind and encouraging to God's Elect than sermons and letters from His messengers wherein are blended His unmitigated, vengeful wrath upon His (and their) enemies; and His unconditional, eternal love upon His Elect; e.g., to wit: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. COME, MY PEOPLE, ENTER THOU INTO THY CHAMBERS, AND SHUT THY DOORS ABOUT THEE; HIDE THYSELF AS IT WERE FOR A LITTLE MOMENT, UNTIL THE INDIGNATION BE OVERPAST. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain." (Isa. 26:19-21.)  Beloved, it looks like Bro. Gill agrees with us in this week's sermon on the comfort given the saints during their great turbulence in the last of the last days; e.g., to wit: "'Thy dead men shall live,' etc.  Sunday, August 7, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  These are the precious words of our dear Lord Jesus to His longsuffering people, promising them great  and good things after their troubles were over, thereby comforting them under all their trials and  disappointments; as that such things should come to pass, which would be as life from the dead; as the  conversion of the Jews (Good Figs, 144,000?), vast numbers of professing Gentiles grown cold, dead  and lifeless." And, moreover, Gill says this may also refer to the First Resurrection, The Second Coming of Christ in power and glory; "together with my dead body shall they arise; or, may be  translated, the church, the mystical body of Christ, and every member of it, though they have been  dead, shall arise, every one of them, and make up that body, which is the fulness of him that filleth all in  all, and that by virtue of their union to Him; there was a pledge and PRESAGE of this," ­ (a  PRESAGE is that which foretells a future event) ­ I say, Hallelujah (!) when the future event is the  Second Coming of our Blessed Savior in Power and Glory (!) when the sermons and letters of all the holy prophets during the final run-up days to the End of the World ­ all with one accord ­ PRESAGE THE GLORIOUS SECOND COMING OF THE SON OF GOD; e.g., to wit:  "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." (Rev. 1:7)  Beloved, please spend some time reading and meditating on the following little passage of very interesting and valuable Scripture; and consider what glorious things it PRESAGES; to wit: "Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and THE GRAVES WERE OPENED; AND MANY BODIES OF THE SAINTS WHICH SLEPT AROSE, AND CAME OUT OF THE GRAVES AFTER HIS RESURRECTION, AND WENT INTO THE HOLY CITY, AND APPEARED UNTO MANY." Mat. 27:50-53. Or, the passage could well be translated, "As my dead body shall they arise," and could then be easily and accurately and beautifully expounded (so, per Kimchi and Ben Melech); to wit: "Just as surely as Christ's dead body was raised, so surely shall every one of His people be raised; Christ's resurrection is the pledge and earnest of theirs; because he lives, they shall live also; he is the first-fruits of them that slept; or as in like manner He was raised, so shall they be raised; as He was raised incorruptible, powerful, spiritual, and glorious, ­ and in the same body! ­ so shall they be; their vile bodies shall be fashioned like unto His glorious body."  Interestingly, this is one of the places in their Old Testament Scriptures from whence the Jews prove the resurrection of the dead; and which they apply to the times of the Messiah, and to the resurrection in His days. To wit: "For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto Himself." (Phil. 3:20,21.) "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him; The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, And what is the exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of His mighty power, Which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the dead, and set Him at His own right hand in the heavenly places, Far above all principality, and power, and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; And hath put all things under his feet, and gave Him to be the head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in all." (Eph. 1:18-23)  Sunday, August 7, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. God's Word for it. When the Lord's people and churches are suffering their sorest of troubles,  persecutions and tribulations, they are encouraged to reflect upon the doctrine I am espousing today; to wit: "Seeing IT IS A RIGHTEOUS THING WITH GOD TO RECOMPENSE TRIBULATION TO  THEM THAT TROUBLE YOU; and to you who are troubled rest (reflect upon) with us, when the  Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance  on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be  punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power." (2 Thes. 1:6-9.) Similarly, wicked judges are warned of God that He would "take them away  as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath. THE RIGHTEOUS SHALL REJOICE WHEN  HE SEETH THE VENGEANCE; HE SHALL WASH HIS FEET IN THE BLOOD OF THE  WICKED. SO THAT A MAN SHALL SAY, VERILY THERE IS A REWARD FOR THE RIGHTEOUS; VERILY HE IS A GOD THAT JUDGETH IN THE EARTH." (Psa. 58:9-11.)  Furthermore, the Book of Revelation tells of the final doom of mighty Babylon, the standing symbol for all organized opposition to God and His people throughout the ages; to wit: "And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth." (Rev. 18:24.) And only after Bloody Babylon is at last totally and completely destroyed will the saints break forth into unfettered exuberance and joy; to wit: "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; FOR GOD HATH AVENGED YOU ON HER." (Rev. 18:20) "Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind; And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land; for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about. ...Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon; and her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her. ...As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth. ...And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her; and they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah." (Jer. 51:1-64)  In addition to the sermons and letters of the prophets being the source of great encouragement and comfort to the Elect on earth, during the turbulent times running up to and including the End of the World ­ all of which we should seek out, study, and learn from. One such incident is recorded in the 21st chapter of Jeremiah; wherein king Zedekiah, in sheer desperation, and abject terror, sends a delegation to solicit help from the prophet Jeremiah against the Babylonian army which was encamped on the king's doorstep. Mind you, this king Zedekiah had treated Jeremiah like a dog. "Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah; Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Behold [not only will I NOT help Zedekiah, but I WILL help the Babylonians to completely destroy KING ZEDEKIAH AND THE WHOLE JEWISH NATION; to wit:] And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; they shall die of a great pestilence. And afterward, saith the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, INTO the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, INTO the hands of their enemies, and INTO the hand of those that seek their life; and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy. ...For I have set my face against this city (the USA) for evil, and not for good, saith the Lord, it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire (the USA)." (Jer. 21:3-7,10)  I love you. Amen.  
