Sunday, March 11, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  None of Babylon's wise men could tell what the king's frightening dream was ­ nor interpret it, ­ on pain of death. Whereupon Daniel was called to the case who, giving all glory to God, spake to the desperate, sleepless, terrified king of mighty Babylon as follows; to wit:  "Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible. This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth." (Dan. 2:31-35.)  Pause here to comment upon the grand and obvious doctrine of the Second Coming of our dear Lord Jesus Christ in great power and glory. Beloved, all human power is nothing but fine powder (ground to infinitely tiny pieces like chaff of the threshingfloor when the iron threshing tools have done their summer work); whereas our blessed Saviour is likened to the infinitely huge "Stone that smote the image and became a great mountain and filled the whole earth." And remember, Beloved, that our Saviour lays claim to "ALL POWER, in Heaven and earth;" to wit: "And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, ALL POWER is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28:18-20) We are engaged in a great spiritual warfare, and "though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." (2 Cor. 10:3-5.) Otherwise, we are beating the air ­ just shadow boxing; to wit: "And this I do for the gospel's sake, that I might be partaker thereof with you. Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, NOT AS ONE THAT BEATETH THE AIR; but I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway." (1 Cor. 9:23-27.)  Beloved, this passage of Scripture has long intrigued me, when taken in conjunction with 2 Cor. 10:3-6; to wit: "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh, (For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself against THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled." (2 Cor. 10:3-6) Beloved, in brief, those not living in obedience ­ strict obedience ­ to the rules of spiritual warfare, are BOXING THE AIR (!)(!). And the first rule is, that our weapons are not carnal, BUT MIGHTY. Don't think lightly of our spiritual weapons. God's word for it, they are real, and they are mighty.  There once was a judge who got elected to the Kansas Supreme Court in the days before they were appointed by the governor, as they now are. His name was Alfred Schroeder. He hated the  Sunday, March 11, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  Westboro Baptist Church, and in a TV interview upon his retirement he may have revealed exactly why he hated us; to wit: As a young man he felt the call to preach, but resisted ­ and eventually rejected ­ the call. He explained that his reason for rejecting the call to preach was that "all a preacher can do is talk." The clear implication was that Mr. Justice Schroeder lusted for power,  and only human judges are called gods with a small "g" in the Bible, because of their relatively  absolute power over the lives, property, reputations, happiness, etc., of their fellow human beings.  The very presence, in close proximity, (only a few blocks away in Topeka) of Westboro Baptist  Church from the Kansas Judicial Center (where Mr. Justice Alfred Schroeder, Chief Justice of the  Kansas Supreme Court, wielded his huge Satanic power).  Well, Beloved, remember the First Rule of spiritual warfare, which all must obey ­ strictly obey ­ or spend all his days on earth doing nothing but BOXING THE AIR (1 Cor. 9:26.) Mr. Justice Alfred Schroeder also took up a slander upon Heaven's weaponry, which God declared to be MIGHTY; to wit: "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, BUT MIGHTY through God to the pulling down of strong holds." (1 Cor. 10:3-4)  When Chief Justice Schroeder, upon his retirement, said that as a young man he rejected God's call to preach because all a preacher can do is talk ­ thereby revealing an unholy lust for power ­ he thereby cast scorn and contempt upon the ONE HOPE FOR DOOMED MANKIND. To wit:  1.) One hope to the pulling down of Satan's strong holds. Beloved, often, God's truth is best  conveyed by the use of metaphors. Think of Satan as a very real commander in chief at the head of a huge dark and malicious army, bent upon the destruction of souls. Therefore: "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world." (1 Pet. 5:8,9) From time to time, Satan and his troops sally forth from well-placed strong-holds in the world, in the conduct of his bloody business the only hope of successfully pulling down of Satan's strong holds is the "mighty" weaponry of God, which Schroeder and his evil ilk mocks and disdains to make use of.  2.) The ONE AND ONLY HOPE to the casting down of imaginations.(The word "imaginations" derives from the word "images" ­ which is the well spring of "idols" from which all idolatry is born and bred in the human breast.) In the first chapter of his splendid treatise on the Christian religion ­ otherwise known as the Book of Romans ­ the apostle Paul backtracks all sodomy (male and female) directly and terminally. Furthermore, the Antediluvian world yields the same result; to wit: "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that He had made man on the earth, and it grieved Him at his heart." (Gen. 6:5,6) Beloved, stunning light from the Antediluvian world (i.e., the world before Noah's Flood) came to us from Australia via the `Letters' pages of the Capital-Journal newspaper posted December 15, 2009, and there is no reason to doubt its genuineness or its credibility. It reads; to wit: "The Westboro Baptists may be on the right track after all, although gay marriage, not just homosexuality, could be the catalyst for the consummation (i.e., the end of the world). With several states ratifying gay marriage, and movements afoot to extend it elsewhere, it could become general (i.e., world-wide). The Babylonian Talmud reveals that until now only one society in all of history practiced it, the Antediluvian. The Babylonian Talmud also says the practice was the reason for Noahs flood. The risk of retribution (the Great Judgment Day of God Almighty) is real. Interestingly, Jesus said the time of His coming would resemble those far off days. He even mentioned ,,marriage and giving in marriage. We in Australia have just had our first such wedding. Its a worry. Ken Hood, Clifton, Australia" Margie called Mr. Hood in Australia. The letter is real. The question is, of all the hundreds of newspapers published in the United States, why  Sunday, March 11, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  did Mr. Hood choose the one in Topeka, Kansas, the one which is home to Westboro Baptist Church, ­ where such matters of the homosexual threat and the consequent Doom of mankind  following world-wide same-sex marriage are regularly expounded from the Scriptures!?  Beloved, I say, Why did he choose us? The opening words of his letter to the editor proves that he knew about us and our worldwide ministry; to wit: "The Westboro Baptists may be on the right track." Yes, Beloved. We have abundant cause for great rejoicing that our Father has chosen us ­ this little group ­ to formulate into a church, a New Testament church of the Lord Jesus Christ, the declaration of faith being that of Peter at Matt. 16:16; to wit: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God," to which the dear Lord Jesus responded, "upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16:18.) Mr. Chief Justice Alfred Schroeder died and hid his burial so that WBC might not attend. "But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?" (Lk. 12:20)  Now back to Romans, chapter one, the proposition being, that God has imposed sodomite slavery upon practicing filthy sodomites as divine punishment for their blasphemous idolatry; to wit: "Because that, when they knew God (i.e., they had some little knowledge of that living and true God) they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful (i.e., they were ungrateful wretches, dabbling in idolatry, Arminian heresy and witchcraft) but became vain in their (sodomitical) imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and to fourfooted beasts, and to creeping things. Wherefore also God gave them up to uncleanness through the lust of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature; and likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient...Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." (Rom. 1:21-28,32.)  One hope to casting down every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God. One hope to bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. All of which idolatry requires the services of the God-called, Holy Ghost-filled preacher. Not Chief Justice Alfred Schroeder, nor each and every one of his judicial brethren. Not the world of academia filled with every professor, teacher, etc. Not the world of the Website Whiz-kids. Not the world of the religious hypocrites, etc. No. None of these. Only the God-called, Holy Ghost-filled, unfettered, Preacher. None else will do. To-wit: "And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled." (2 Cor. 10:6)  Beloved, let me put it to you again from the two passages in First and Second Corinthians. Those not living in obedience ­ strict obedience ­ to the rules of spiritual warfare as laid out herein, are BOXING THE AIR (!)(!). "Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but only one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things, Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, NOT AS ONE THAT BEATETH THE AIR; But I keep under, my body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway." (1 Cor. 9:23-27) I love you. Amen.  
