Sunday, January 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Our dear Lord Jesus, in taking upon Himself His earthly work as our Redeemer, became our mighty Goel, our smarting Surety, and the High Priest of our Profession. "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus. Who was faithful to Him that appointed Him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house. For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honor than the house. For every house is builded by some man; but He that built all things is God. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; But Christ as a Son over His own house; WHOSE HOUSE ARE WE, IF WE HOLD FAST THE CONFIDENCE AND THE REJOICING OF THE HOPE FIRM UNTO THE END. Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will hear his voice, Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness; When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do alway err in their heart; and they have not known my ways. So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.) Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the LIVING GOD. But exhort one another DAILY, while it is called To Day; lest any of you be hardened through the DCEITFULNESS OF SIN. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end; While it is said, To Day if ye will hear His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. For some, when they had heard, did provoke; howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses. But with whom was He grieved forty years? Was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness? And to whom sware he that they should not enter into His rest, but to them that believed not? So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief." (Heb. 3:1-19)  The specific instance of unbelief that so angered the Lord, and brought such calamitous consequences upon the doomed male population of an entire generation of Jews ­ I say, one specific instance; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel." (Num. 13:1,2.) Got it? The Lord said, I give you Canaan Land. You are not spying to determine the feasibility of conquering that Land, but only the quickest access into it, and its productivity.  So, arrangements were made, and after forty days the twelve spies returned with their report; to wit: "And they returned from searching of the land after forty days. And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel and showed them the fruit of the land. And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it. Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the cities are walled, and very great; And moreover we saw the children of Anak there. The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south; and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the mountains; and the Canaanites dwell by the sea and by the coast of the Jordan. And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, LET US GO UP AT ONCE, AND POSSESS IT; FOR WE ARE WELL ABLE TO OVERCOME IT. (Beloved, this little speech of Caleb's, and the context in which it was delivered, ranks among the grandest and most glorious ever delivered. And more and better, with Joshua's, is coming.) But the men that went up with him said, We be NOT able to go against the people; for they are stronger than we.  Sunday, January 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  And they brought up an EVIL REPORT OF THE LAND which they had searched unto the  children of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, is a land that  eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great stature.  And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants; and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight." (Num. 13:26-33.)  Thereupon, Beloved, the stage was set for one of the most dramatic contests in human history. The question that each son and daughter of Adam must answer for him/her self is just this: Will I trust God and live for Him 100%? ­ or not? ­ all the days of my life? Near the end of His life on earth our dear Lord Jesus was often sorrowful, and, strangely, "He charged His disciples that they should tell no man that He was Jesus the Christ. From that time forth began Jesus to show unto His disciples, how that He must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. Then Peter took Him, and began to rebuke Him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord; THIS SHALL NOT BE UNTO THEE. But He turned, and said unto Peter, GET THEE BEHIND ME, SATAN; Thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. Then said Jesus unto His disciples, IF ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME, LET HIM DENY HIMSELF, AND TAKE UP HIS CROSS, AND FOLLOW ME. For whosoever will save his life will lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, will find it. For what is a man profitted, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the son of man shall come in the glory of his father, with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works." (Mat. 16:20-27.) Beloved. Life has a way ­ by the everlasting beneficent Providence of our loving Father ­ I say, life has a way of bringing each of us to the foot of the mountains of Canaan Land, at which time the Lord's servant will remind us that the Lord God has given us such a glorious place to live and all we have to do is possess it. Whereupon the Enemy of our souls takes up a slander upon the good land, followed by rendering an evil report upon the good land; to wit: "And the men which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him, BY BRINGING UP A SLANDER UPON THE LAND, Even those men that did bring up THE EVIL REPORT UPON THE LAND, died by the plague before the Lord." (Num. 14:36,37)  Our children will suffer, if we follow the Lord wholly. We will be called fanatics. Their job opportunities will be diminished ­ drastically. Our children, our children, our children. Satan's device. Hear them wail, as I remind you that a sovereign God will punish you severely ­ as the pattern shows distinctly. You will get exactly zero sympathy, if you push that poor little children argument in the blessed face of God. You stayed awake all night weeping and wailing ­ for naught. Tears of blatant unbelief. Tears of blasphemy and heresy. Shame on you. Rejoice in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Save Caleb and Joshua and their seed, who were of a different spirit, and who "FULLY" (Num. 14:24) followed the Lord, and "WHOLLY" (Deut. 1:36) followed the Lord.  Beloved, look at this scene that played itself out at Kadesh Barnea on the border of Canaan Land so long ago. Look at it until you see it. Raw human emotions and passion is on display in all its varied forms, and the stakes are nothing less than Heaven and Hell for an entire generation of Jewish rebels ­ thousands of people. Call it, "The Anatomy of Deadly Rebellion." In the first place, they had no business sending that twelve-man spying expedition on that forty-day inspection tour of the Promised Land of Canaan ­ which was an insult to God Who had assured them not only of its beauty and fertility, but also of its ease of possession in their hands. That is, they had only to walk in and take possession. The unbelieving Jewish rulers simply did not rejoice in the Lord and in the  Sunday, January 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  power of His might, EVEN THOUGH THEY HAD WITNESSED THE RED SEA CROSSING  ON DRY LAND, AND NINE OTHER STUPENDOUS MIRACLES; to wit:  "Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and tempted me now THESE TEN TIMES, AND HAVE NOT HEARKENED TO MY VOICE; Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, NEITHER SHALL ANY OF THEM THAT PROVOKED ME SEE IT." (Num. 14:22,23)  The rebellious Jews also sponsored the evil report and slander upon the land, and for which, THEY PAID WITH THEIR LIVES, DYING OF THE PAINFUL PLAGUE, PROMPTLY. Beloved, the Land of Canaan, the Promised Land, the Happy Land of song and poem, has, since the earliest days of the Church, been the standing type and symbol of the joyous local church living lives of spiritual victory, "Bound for the Promised Land." Not usually a type of Heaven; but most usually a type of the happy church whose members are sensible of being "Bound for Heaven." It is a beautiful metaphor. Satan, and his dark angels, and his demon-possessed minions, are well aware of that beautiful metaphor, and has become skilled ­ through the years ­ of exploiting that knowledge, by attacking the peace and loving tranquility of her who is "fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners." (Song 6:10.)  "On Jordan's stormy banks I stand, And cast a wishful eye, to Canaan's fair and happy land, Where my possessions lie. I am bound for the promised land; I am bound for the promised land. O, who will come and go with me? I am bound for the Promised Land. Oh, the transporting rapt'rous scene, That rises to my sight! Sweet fields arrayed in living green, And rivers of delight ! There gen'rous fruits that never fail, On trees immortal grow; There rocks, and hills, and brooks, and vales, with milk and honey flow. All o'er those wide extended plains shines one eternal day; there God the Son forever reigns, and scatters night away. No chilling winds, or pois'nous breath, Can reach that healthful shore; Sickness and sorrow, pain and death, are felt and feared no more. When shall I reach that happy place, And be forever blest ? When shall I see my Father's face, And in His bosom rest ? Filled with delight, my raptured soul can here no longer stay; Though Jordan's waves around me roll, Fearless I'd launch away. I am bound for the Promised Land; I am bound for the Promised Land; Oh, who will come and go with me? I am bound for the Promised Land."  In that old Isaac Watts song, which the Southern Baptists claim as their National Anthem, both types or symbols are used. That is, some verses are types of Heaven, and some are types of loving and militant and victorious churches on earth, whose members are, like Job, choice targets of Satan's arrows; to-wit: "Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them. And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant, Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?" (Job 1:6-8) I take it, Beloved, from the fearful consequences of the generation of the Jews ­ sometimes called the congregation ­ and the swift and terrible and eternal punishment ­ all at the foot of the mountains of the Canaanites, and all involving the evil report upon the land and bringing up a slander upon the land ­ I say, I take it that all these things were written for our example upon whom the end of the world is come. The short of the message from God to man seems to be that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. (Heb. 10:31.)  Sunday, January 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved, Paul spent three years preaching night and day to the church at Ephesus, and a whole lots of people joined the church, including, doubtless, many goats among the sheep in those early days of the rapidly-growing church, whose candlestick would soon be removed, history proves. At any rate, many warnings from the apostle remain to our highest and best use and benefit; to wit:  "Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which He hath purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified...and when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him onto the ship." (Acts 20:28-38)  Often the Lord deals with generations, and congregations, and nations, and worlds. But His principles remain the same; and I am telling you, Beloved, God Almighty, our Father, is listening and paying close attention to what His enemies say, and do, to their hard speeches against Him; and He will get even with you, by and by; to wit: "And REPAYETH THEM THAT HATE HIM TO THEIR FACE; to destroy them; he will not be slack to him that hateth him, but will repay him to his face." (Deut. 7:10)  Just think, Beloved, how easy it would have been for the omnipotent God of all creation and all power to have dispossessed Canaan Land of every last enemy nation. Remember that one angel slew 185 thousand fierce Assyrian troops in one night. "Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed. Thou shalt not be affrighted at them; for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible." (See, Deut. 7:20,21.) Joshua and Caleb, the super good guys in this deadly drama, rent their clothes and said to the whole company of Jewish rebels, to wit: "If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey. Only rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the land; FOR THEY ARE BREAD FOR US; THEIR DEFENSE IS DEPARTED FROM THEM, AND THE LORD IS WITH US; FEAR THEM NOT. But all the congregation bade stone them with stones (!)(!)(!)" (Num. 14:6-10)  Whereupon the wrath of the Lord fell upon those Jewish rebels, of fearful intensity and duration. But the blessings of God commenced to fall upon Joshua and Caleb ­ who followed the Lord "fully" and "wholly" ­ throughout their lifetimes.  Beloved, let us join Joshua and Caleb ­ singing as we go; to wit:  "I've reached the land of corn and wine, and all its riches freely mine, Here shines undimmed one blissful day, for all my night has passed away. O Beulah Land, sweet Beulah Land, As on thy highest mount I stand. I look away across the sea, where mansions are prepared for me, and view the shining glory shore, my Heav'n, my home for ever more!"  I love you.  Amen.  
