Sunday, April 15, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka is an Old School or Primitive Baptist Church. It has existed in this evil place for fifty-seven years; "having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, ... saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." Revelation 14:6-7. And saying:  "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created." Revelation 4:11.  And, "Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing" for thou "hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation." Revelation 5:9, 12.  Thus for fifty-seven years in this place, Westboro Baptist Church has insisted with much contention and disputation upon the absolute sovereignty of God, the absolute predestination of all things, and the absolute autonomy and independency of the local Church as the only divinely established and divinely authorized religious institution on earth. These three powerful notions fairly summarize the everlasting gospel. One, the absolute sovereignty of God; two, the absolute predestination of all things; and three, the absolute autonomy and independency of the local Church as the only divinely established and divinely authorized religious institution on earth.  My friend, if you are not well versed and knowledgeable on those three principles you are truly ignorant. I say this advisedly. Whatever else you may know or think you know; however many academic degrees you may have earned; however smart or sharp or clever you are or think you are; I say to you with great boldness if you are not an expert, if you are not extremely knowledgeable on the subjects of the absolute sovereignty of God, the absolute predestination of all things, and the only Church that Jesus built; you are truly ignorant. You are a smart, well-educated ignoramus; you are a fool; Psalm 14:1. You have hitherto spent your life and invested all your energies in trivia. Listen: "Wherefore do you spend your resources for that which does not nourish your soul? And your labour for that which satisfieth not?" (Isaiah 55:2)  Here the prophet puts a rhetorical question which may be fairly paraphrased as follows: Why are you wasting your life on non essentials? Why are you living your life as a horse or a mule? Psalm 32:9. Or as some other dumb brute beast? 2 Peter 2:12. The years are going by very rapidly and you are still dumb on these three subjects. What in God's name are you doing with your time on this earth? Listen to this further rhetorical question by Jesus Christ himself: "What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" Mark 8:36. And this redundant rhetorical question in close proximity: "What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" That is, exactly what price tag have you hung on your never-dying soul, brother? Mark 8:37.  Judging by your conduct of studied, wilful ignorance respecting the weighty issues of divine truth, you place a very small price on your soul indeed. Peter calls it, "a willing ignorance." 2 Peter 3:5. And, so it is. Listen: "For this they willingly are ignorant of ... the word of God." 2 Peter 3:5. My friend, you are willingly ignorant of the mighty doctrines of the absolute sovereignty of God; absolute predestination of all things; and, of the only Church that Jesus built. These three great and mighty themes constituting in the aggregate the only message of divinely revealed truth from God to man in the earth; you have deliberately determined to be and remain ignorant of. And this powerfully demonstrates that you really smart citizens of this generation have hung a very small price tag indeed on your souls. Listen:  Sunday, April 15, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  "But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God  ordained before the world unto our glory: which none of the princes of this world  knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Yet not  the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes [or leaders] of this world, that come to  nought." (1 Corinthians 2:6-8)  Listen to me ye really smart people: you can talk politics, business, investments, law and education; you are so really, smart; you are so proud of your achievements, background, reputation, generosity, schools, United Way, and your churches, so called; all such constitutes "the wisdom of this world" and of the leaders of this world; and all of which, God's word for it, "comes to nought." 1 Corinthians 2:6. You are spending your resources for that which does not feed the soul. Isaiah 55:2. You are hanging a very tiny price tag on your soul. Mark 8:37. Talk to me about the grand old doctrines of the absolute sovereignty of God; the absolute predestination of all things; and of the only Church that Jesus built. You can and should be among the world's foremost experts on these weighty matters of God's everlasting truth. But you cannot begin to discuss such things intelligently and knowledgeably. You are embarrassed to try; you are tongue-tied; you are mute; dumb; and ignorant; and God's word for it, you are willingly ignorant. 2 Peter 3:5. And, uncharacteristically of your usual prudence in important matters of life, you brush all such weighty issues aside, in a cavalier fashion, and leave custody of your never-dying souls in the hands of witch doctors; which you vainly refer to as "ministers," "priests," or "rabbis;" presiding over voodoo religious systems which you vainly refer to as "churches" and "synagogues." And, all the while, your lives are messed up with gross filth in the form of sodomy, adultery and fornication; virtually all of you fine, educated, smart citizens are either sodomites, adulterers, or fornicators. And many, if not most of you, are all three. You are busily seeking relief from your messed up lives from your voodoo witch doctors; pervert psychiatrists; wiseacre social engineers, and lying, greedy effeminate political and governmental leaders that currently rule in perfidy over your affairs.  "O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths." Isaiah 3:12. "As for my people, infants and perverts rule over them." Isaiah 3:12. Here we have an accurate Bible description and word picture of the current political; governmental and religious leadership of this evil generation; and it could not be worse. Here the dominant personal qualities of our leaders are set forth; here the dominate attributes of our leaders are identified by tropes -- t-r-op-e-s. A trope is a figure of speech whereby one thing is put for another thing for the sake of emphasis and effect. The first trope in this passage of scripture is the word translated "children" or "infants." And the second trope is "women." By these two words as tropes the dominant qualities, characteristics or attributes of these leaders are described. The first, "infants," stands for ignorance and weakness. A new-born human infant is of all intelligent organisms the most ignorant and the most weak.  Thus, these leaders of the people are powerfully described as being supremely ignorant on all important matters, and supremely weak or spineless intellectually, morally and spiritually. And such, my friend, is a most accurate description of the political, governmental and religious leaders today. They are, one and all, and without apparent exception, truly ignorant and truly weak people. They are truly ignorant of God and His word and of all important matters however educated they may boast themselves to be; and they are truly weak and spineless when it comes to personal and public morals and when it comes to spiritual principles. Just look at these spineless, immoral wonders who presently hold political and governmental positions in this world. From Presidents to the Prime Ministers to the Legislative bodies to the judges at every level from the Hague down to the smallest Municipal Judge and Municipal Officeholders.  Sunday, April 15, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  A more miserable bunch of ignorant, weak, spineless individuals never existed at any one time in any one place in recorded history in all probability. And they spend a lot of their time on taxpayers'  money bragging on each other. The second of the two tropes in this passage of scripture is  translated, "women;" meaning, in the original, effeminate or morally perverted. Thus these leaders  of the people are powerfully described as being supremely effeminate and morally perverse. It is a  word associated in scripture with sodomy and idolatrous religious systems; as in the description of  the great whore of Revelation Chapter 17. Listen:  "Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters: with whom the world's leaders have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication." (Revelation 17:1-2) And such, my friend, is a most accurate description of the political and governmental and religious leaders of our day. They are one and all, and without apparent exception, truly effeminate and truly perverted morally in their personal lives and habits and attitudes. Just look at these effeminate, perverted human beings who presently hold political office and governmental positions in this generation. Many of them are homosexuals: gay men and lesbian women. Most of them are adulterers and adulteresses; divorced and remarried; and divorced and remarried; again and again. Virtually all of them are fornicators; having sex with others than the spouse of the youth. And this situation of immorality and sexual perversion obtains from the Presidents to the Prime Ministers to the Legislative bodies to the judges at every level from the Hague down to the smallest Municipal Judge and Municipal Officeholders. Listen:  "Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men: in whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes." (Psalm 26:9-10)  Listen: "For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins," saith the Lord, "they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in their courts from their right." Amos 5:12. Hear that! "They turn aside the poor in their courts from their right." Amos 5:12.  These weak, effeminate sexual perverts, who sit as leaders and judges and bribe-taking politicians in this evil place have well-nigh closed the doors of our courts to the poor. And this is a situation everywhere described in the scriptures as being a certain sign of great apostasy and approaching doom for any people. Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom: "Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of the poor in his cause." Exodus 23:6.  "Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thee ... and they shall judge the people with just judgment. Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live." (Deuteronomy 16:18-20)  My friend, these are everlasting principles of truth coming down from God Almighty to sons of men on earth. Human government and human courts exist by authority of God himself to do justice and to vindicate the poor and the needy. Proverbs 31:9. And, when a people reach the place where judgment is denied the poor and the courts are closed to the poor: that people is doomed. And, I tell you with great conviction, derived from knowledge and experience, that we have reached that place in this nation. Justice is being systematically wrested from the poor. The courts, for all practical purposes, are being systematically closed to the supplications of the poor. And these weak, effeminate sexual perverts who sit as leaders and judges and political bribe-takers in this evil place are turning aside the poor in their courts from their right. Amos 5:12. They are wresting the judgment of the poor: that is twisting it from their grasp; and perverting the words of the righteous. Deuteronomy 16:20. Listen:  Sunday, April 15, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  "And this have ye done... insomuch that He regardeth not thy religious offering any  more, or receiveth it with good will at your hand. Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the  LORD hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou  hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. And  did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he  might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal  treacherously against the wife of his youth. For the LORD, the God of Israel, saith that  he hateth putting away: for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the LORD of  hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously." (Mal. 2:13-16)  This passage powerfully teaches that under no circumstances is divorce and remarriage permissible; and that such conduct incurs the divine wrath in a special measure. This passage powerfully states that the whole cause of divorce and remarriage is infidelity and treachery. This passage powerfully teaches that divorce and remarriage is a high crime against the truth of God in the earth, and against the true Church. Such that those tainted by divorce and remarriage in any way may not be members of the true Church. This passage also teaches that God Almighty himself is a witness to the first least motions of infidelity and treachery in the heart which leads to divorce and remarriage. This passage powerfully cuts and pierces, discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart. "Yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant." (Malachi 2:14)  My friend, when you cut that covenant, made that contract with the wife of your youth; it was a solemn compact ratified in heaven, sealed by the Almighty himself, and done for life. One man; one woman; one lifetime. The argument is ancient and everlasting. Get it: "Did not he make twain one?" Adam and Eve; and they two shall be one flesh, joined together by God himself. "Did not God make twain one?" Twain equals two. Not three, not four, not five. Adam and Eve; not Adam and Eve and Mary and Virginia and Sally and Susan. "Did not God make twain one?" Listen: "Yet had he the residue of the spirit." (Malachi 2:15)  That is, when God in the beginning made man, "he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." Genesis 2:7. The spirit of God breathed into human nostrils produced Adam and Eve, twain, and they were made one. And that creative power of the Almighty God did not exhaust God, he had plenty of power--spirit--left; "yet had he the residue of the spirit." If God had wanted to simultaneously create Eve and Mary and Virginia and Sally and Susan; he very easily could have. "Yet had he the residue of the spirit." That is, he had plenty of power--spirit--left to have gone on creating mates for Adam. But the plan for one man, one woman, one lifetime was deliberate and purposeful, and came from God himself as a type of Christ and his bride, the Church. And just as Christ has only one bride, one church; and those twain are inseparable; even so a man may have only one wife, and those twain are inseparable. "Yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant." Malachi 2:14. Listen:  "This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church." (Eph. 5:32)  My friend, you can no more lawfully put away the wife of your youth than Christ can put away his Church: a thing blasphemous and unthinkable. Hence, "Marriage is honourable in all,"--that is all times, all places and all people -- "and the marriage bed" -- only and exclusively -- "is undefiled" -- sex in any other form, time, place or manner than between spouses of the youth, is defiled -- "but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge." That word, "judge," is "Krino," meaning God will condemn and damn. Hebrews 13:4. Whoremongers are those who condone or recognize or sanction in some way whorish or adulterous conduct on the part of others. Preachers or churches who receive in their memberships divorced and remarried people are whoremongers. Hebrews 13:4. We live in a city and a state awash with whoremongers and adulterers, ruled over by leaders who are themselves whoremongers and adulterers. Isaiah 3:12. I love you. Amen.  
