Sunday, May 5, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  Any day now a fearsome noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; FOR THE LORD HATH A CONTROVERSY WITH THE NATIONS, He will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord. This includes most of mankind from Adam to the end of time, and -- God's Word for it -- the overwhelming majority will not enjoy a respectable funeral for their loved ones, but will, rather, be reduced to nothing but stinking dung on the ground; to wit: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground. Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel. And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape. A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture. And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce anger of the Lord. He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger." (Jer. 25:32-38)  Westboro Baptist Church has faced enormous criticism for stating the plain everyday truth. These people who have rejected God and his word and lived lives of perverseness and blasphemy get in a heat and a bother when we preach truth timely, where their loved ones are in hell and where their miserable carcasses are on earth. Whereas Westboro Baptist Church has solid Bible truth that we are supposed to criticize people in their graves if they lived lives that are worthy of such criticism, to wit: We are not suggesting and we have not been advised by the Lord our God in a way of suggestion, but rather we have been advised by the Lord our God by way of solid commandments. Our Savior said: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (John 14:21)  We choose at Westboro Baptist Church to obey the commandments of the Lord our God and bask in the joys and pleasures of that, and the others choose to reject the commandments of the Lord our God and enjoy the pleasures of hell, to wit: "Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native country. For thus saith the Lord touching Shallum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth out of this place; He shall not return thither any more: But he shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more. Woe unto him that buildeth his house in unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not for his work; That saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and it is cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion. Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the LORD. But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it. Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, saying,  Sunday, May 5, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!  He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem." (Jer. 22:10-19.) What kind of creature deserved that kind of treatment? Probably the  worst thing that Jehoiakim ever did in his miserable God-rejecting life was to kill the prophets of  God, to destroy the word of God.  God's word for it, the worst thing that a mortal can do is to curse the word of God and curse the servants of God, and even to the point of murdering and attempting to murder. Ah yes beloved, there is plenty of cause that this man deserves to lie on the ground as a pile of dung. Jehoiakim was the son of Josiah, about whom the Lord said no king ever excelled in righteousness, and as the son of Josiah, he jolly well knew the gravity of casting the Word of God out of the vocabulary of Judah and burning its leaves as described by the Holy Ghost in that incident. "And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king. Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him. And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth. Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words. Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would not hear them. But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the LORD hid them." (Jer 36:20-26.)  I say to the youth of this church that the sins of Jehoiakim included murdering the prophets and, God's word for it, nothing on earth is worse than murdering the prophets for preaching the Word of God to the sons of men. He not only is an ass but he is a jackass. Drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem and he shall not return thither any more, but he shall die in the place wherein they have led him captive and shall see this land NO more.  The Lord God says he has exalted his Word above his Name even. What do you think the Lord God is going to do when his blessed Word is rubbed into the mud and cut into pieces and burned in the hearth and then you attempted to arrest and murder and only by the miraculous intervention of God Almighty did the Lord's people escape that filthy king Jehoiakim and forever seal his doom as the enemy of God and of the righteous. God said of him: "But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it." (Jer. 22:17) I love the legend of Daniel Webster and his love for the Union; to wit: every time there's a thunderstorm around Massachusetts, they will say you can hear Webster's voice, that you can hear him in the hollows of the sky. They will say that if you go to Webster's grave and speak loud and clear, "Daniel Webster ­ Daniel Webster!" the ground will begin to shiver and the trees begin to shake. And after a while, you will hear Webster's voice saying, "How goes it with the Union? How goes it with the Union? If the Union is well, your lives are well." Transpose the scene; "Fred Phelps ­ Fred Phelps! How goes the Church? If the church is well, your lives are well."  I love you. Amen.  Sunday, May 5, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  We are in a great and actual war beloved, a war with real casualties. Our sworn and implacable enemy, the prince of the power of the air (Eph. 2:2) pulls out all of the stops in this war due to his rage, malice, and cruelty. Sometimes in this war God sends new recruits and sometimes beloved we have deserters. But, rest assured, the Lord knows who fights for Him and who fights for His adversary. "Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, let everyone that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity." (2 Tim. 2:19). The battle is not won by who has the largest army. "There is no restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few. (1 Sam. 14:6).  The battle lines are drawn beloved and we are required to hold our position and not give up our ground, not an inch, on these ancient landmarks, no matter how many we fight against. No fag marriage. No sodomy. No adultery. No fornication. King Hezekiah was involved in one of the greatest sieges and deliverances of all time. Hezekiah did that which was right in the sight of the LORD. He removed the high places, broke the images, and cut down the groves (2 Kgs 18:3-4). He trusted in the LORD, so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him. He clave to the LORD, and departed not from following Him, but kept His commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses (2 Kings 18:5-6). He believed God and rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not (2 Kings 18:7). In the fourth year of his reign the King of Assyria besieged Israel, the ten northern tribes, and in three years utterly took it and carried the nation away to Assyria (2 Kings 18:9-11).  The Assyrians were a juggernaut. They won victories by superb organization, tactics and weapons. Seven years after the successful conquest of Israel the vast Assyrian army comes to take Judah. They know the people (they spent 10 years in Israel), they know the Jews' language, the history of the nation, the religion, the terrain, the weather, and the warfare tactics of the Jews because they had just completely wiped out Israel. The military tactics of the Assyrians were extremely advanced. They were experts in war including fighting from horseback and chariots which gave them speed and agility. They had advanced archery methods. They developed a sophisticated triangle attach strategy for penetrating vast, high, deep, city walls and defenses. This included attacking the walls of a city at opposite ends to slaughter wall guards, so it would overwhelm the defenders while scaling the middle of the walls with huge ladders while simultaneously tunneling and digging under the walls to make them collapse.  They were good at that, but even better at psychological warfare, designed to strike fear into opponents and potential adversaries. Their tactics were extreme and brutal. It included killing every living person and thing when entering a city; taking thousands of captives and burning them alive. When captives were not killed, they were kept as slaves in humiliating and brutal circumstances or forced to resettle in foreign lands. Captives were often used as human shields on the battle field as well. This is a slam dunk. Sennacherib, King of Assyria and his Commander of the Joint Chiefs, Rabshakeh encamp round about Jerusalem to take it. Rabshakeh starts with the psychological warfare ­ he says to Hezekiah I will give you two thousand horses if you can even find riders for them (2 Kgs 18:23). He says to the people, "let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you out of our hand: Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The LORD will surely deliver us" (2 Kgs 18:29-30). He says, "none of the other gods of the peoples we conquered were able to deliver them out of our hand" (2 Kgs 18:33-35).  Sunday, May 5, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  Yes, that's true. There are countless counterfeit religions out there. But now Mr. Power Broker,  Mr. King of the World, you are threatening the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, the apple of the  eye of the Living and True God (1 Thes. 1:9) and the God of forces (Dan. 11:38). You do well  Mr. Mocker, Mr. Scoffer, Mr. Blasphemer to not mess with the Church of God Almighty, the  bride of Christ. Hezekiah immediately humbled himself before God in sack cloth and ashes and  spread the matter before Him (2 Kgs 19:14). He sent his servants to the prophet Isaiah to inquire of God for him. The Lord answered Hezekiah through Isaiah, and said "be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard" (2 Kgs 19:6). He told Hezekiah to sit tight and don't give an inch and wait on Him. The Lord told Hezekiah "the king of Assyria is not coming into this city (he won't break the plane of the walls), nor will he shoot a single arrow, nor will he come before the city with a shield, nor cast a bank against it." God said "I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake." (2 Kgs 19:34). "And it came to pass that  night, that the angel of the LORD went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred  fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses." (2 Kgs 19:35). We don't give an inch beloved.  The following is adapted from The Christian in Complete Armour, William Gurnell, 1616-1679. Hold your positions fellow solider, hold your faith, we send news of Christ. He is coming to relieve you and rest assured victory is with him. Remember the exploits of Christ's soldiers before you which by faith they achieved (remember Hezekiah). Be thankful for every victory and let not the howling wilderness yet before you make you forget the songs of your praises or give way to temptations. We cannot put our guard down beloved, we must remember we are still in our enemy's country (behind enemy lines). Be sure you stand in close order amongst yourselves; these times give us too many sad examples of such, who first fell from communion with their brethren, and then into the devourer's hands; stragglers are soon snapped up. Keep in close communion with the body! Let not only your particular safety, but of the whole army of saints, be in your eye and care, especially that company or congregation in which you march. That soldier who can see the enemy fight with his brethren, and not help him, makes it the more easy on the next day to fall to the same enemy. Watch over one another, not to play critics on your brother's failings and triumph when he halts, but to help him if he falls, or if possible, to keep him from falling by a timely rescue. Keep your rank and file, hold your position. Beloved, in a bloody war, hardened soldiers don't lay down their weapons. If you are not laboring in the word and doctrine every day, if you are not expanding your spiritual knowledge, if you are not praying and seeking God every day, if you are not warring against sin and taking up your cross daily and creating charity in this body ­ then you are laying down your spiritual weapons and your spiritual armour. No one is exempt from this duty. Harden yourselves against the scandals which the cowardice and treachery of false brethren hath given you. He is the right soldier that is not discouraged by those that run from the battle or that are slain in battle. Disentangle your hearts as you are able from the love of and distracting cares for, this present world. Mortify your hearts against this world and roll your cares upon God and then you are fit to march wherever Christ will lead you. The want of this hath made many run home to save their own private stake there, when they should have been in the field for Christ. And, now, my Christian friends, march on not in the confidence of your armour, but in the confidence of our Captain that comes to relieve us, and the power of His might, who hath promised shortly to subdue Satan under your feet.  I love you. Amen.  
