To the Saints of God at Topeka, Kansas February 1, 2015  Beloved, I was going to talk about the third church of Revelation two and three (Pergamos), but something came up. I was recently asked if I had ever spoken on the topic of the early churches of America, like the Pilgrims and the Puritans. I have not, but I thought it was a good topic. On nearly a daily basis we are defiantly told by the reprobates that if we do not like this country we should leave. They will not for one second consider they should stop their proud defiant sinning before God, but they conclude that the answer is that we should leave. Like the false priest in Amos 7:10 saying: the land is not able to bear all his (Amos') words.  The LORD put us here, and we are going to stay here and preach to this godless country like Elijah preached to Ahab (I Kings 17:1) and the ten northern tribes of Israel. The second answer to that question, which I sometimes have said to someone in my face saying those words, is: "No, we got here first," meaning that this country was founded by people that generally believed the doctrines of Grace. I am referring to the Pilgrims, the Puritans and the Baptists. Beloved, we spend a fair amount of time telling this apostate nation that when it was first formed some of the people here actually feared God, and God greatly blessed this nation and then they sinned away their day of grace. I think there is some value in giving you a little history of not just religion in this country, but overall Christian religious history dating back many years. I think you will be able to see just how great the sins of this nation are and just how far we have spiritually fallen in this country.  Jamestown, Plymouth Colony (Pilgrims), Massachusetts Bay Colony (Puritans)  The first permanent English settlement that would eventually become the United  States of America was in Jamestown, Virginia in 1607. This was a relatively small  colony and was almost abandoned at one point, but eventually it did come to  thrive. The religion of Jamestown was Anglican (Church of England). They were  sponsored by the London Company to look for treasure and look for business and  trading interests.  So, if you do not count the Indians, there has been a  1  settlement here in the United States for a little over 400 years. After Jamestown, nothing much happened in America until 1620 when the Mayflower came with 102 settlers, half of which were Church of England Separatists which we know as the Pilgrims. They were looking for a place with true religious freedom. They settled at Plymouth and started a colony there. They came out of that stinking church of England and they rightly believed that to truly serve God acceptably they had to separate themselves from that cancerous church. So, what about the Puritans? The Puritans came in 1628 and established Massachusetts Bay Colony. The Puritans also were a part of the church of England but they did not necessarily want to separate from the church, they wanted to purify the church of England from the inside. The Puritans were not loved by the church of England's faithful, including the monarchs. In 1639 the Baptists came to America to also pursue religious freedom. So, before I tell you more about these groups and what they believed and how their experiences helped formulate the beliefs of this country early on including the First Amendment and such, it is important to understand why they left England and Europe and to understand that you need a background in the Catholic church, the Waldensians, the Protestant Reformation and the Anabaptists. So, you basically get a broad history of Christianity for the last thousand years or so. Roman Catholics and the Inquisition During the middle ages, sometimes called the dark ages (5th Century to the 15th Century) the Roman Catholics controlled much of the religious institutions of Western Europe and had significant influence far outside of religion including wielding substantial political power as well. In the 1200's under pope Innocent III (are you kidding me? How about pope Sinful Depraved and Abominable I) they claimed "Ecclesiastical liberty is nowhere better preserved than where the Roman church has full power in temporal as well as spiritual matters." From that time through the 1500's there was a struggle for secular power between the Roman Catholic church and the monarchs of that day in much of Europe. The complete dominance of the Roman Catholics led to many awful abuses including the Inquisition. In 1231 Pope Gregory IX created a special court to 2  investigate suspected heretics and force them to change their beliefs. This was the beginning of the Inquisition. The inquisitors worked in total secrecy and used brutal torture as a way to punish and exact confessions from so-called heretics. Those who refused to change their beliefs were sentenced to death by burning. In 1542 these courts were reconstituted to combat the Protestant Reformation and eventually became an organ of papal government. They tortured and killed tens of thousands during the Reformation as that movement gained power and they tried to squelch it. The institution of the Inquisition was not abolished until 1904 (a reign of 700 years). The total torture/death toll from the Inquisition will never be known because the Catholics are the most secretive people on earth and want to bury that brutal part of their past. Torture estimates range in the hundreds of thousands to over a million, while death estimates range in the thousands to hundreds of thousands. Do you know the difference between the Catholics and ISIS? Nothing, except ISIS is more humane. This is not hyperbole, it is truth. Here is what J.M. Carroll says in The Trail of Blood:  "The whole world is seemingly filled with books written in condemnation of that extreme cruelty, and yet it was originated and perpetuated by a people claiming to be led and directed by the Lord. For real barbarity there seems to be nothing, absolutely nothing in all history that will surpass it."  But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? Mat. 5:44- 46  Lux lucet in tenebris "Light glows in the darkness  Waldenses A favorite target of the Catholics for inquisitions were the Waldensians which some say began in France in 1173 by Peter Waldo who was a wealthy businessman. Mr. Waldo sold all that he had and 3  gave it to the Roman Catholic church and began preaching on the streets. This of course was a huge "no-no" for the Catholics that believed only the priests should read the Bible and preach. He and his followers were excommunicated from the Catholic church in 1184 by pope Lucius III and were one of the first reformers of the Catholic church, (300 years before Luther, Calvin and the Protestant Reform). They were brutally and relentlessly hunted down and murdered by the Catholic church nearly to extinction. According to McClintock and Strong, the Catholic church sought to exterminate them and did so for over 300+ years. By the way, McClintock and Strong is one of two religious encyclopedias we have in the library, the other is Schaft-Herzog. It is like a World Book for religion. They can be quite helpful when you are looking for the history of something, like the history of Christmas or such. What the Catholics did to the Waldensians was nothing less than genocide. They literally would send armies into the villages of the Waldensians to kill them and this happened decade after decade, century after century. The Catholics could do this, because at times they had both religious and secular (non-religious) control of governments including the army and police. McClintock and Strong says the Waldenses essentially believed the doctrines of the reformers of the 16th century including: the bible is the only authority for faith and religion; they rejected traditions and the authority of the fathers; they recognized baptism and the Lord's Supper only and rejected all other rites; they considered temples, crosses, images, pilgrimages, and the worship of holy relics as inventions of Satan, of the flesh, and full of superstition; they vehemently repudiated the Pope's authority; they rejected the papal doctrine of purgatory, acknowledging only two terminations of the earthly state heaven and hell; they admit to no indulgences, they admit to no confessions of sin; the marriage of clergy is lawful and necessary; and they denounced the Roman Catholics as the "Whore of Babylon." Another thing that they did was to translate the Bible from Latin into the common language so people other than Catholic priests could read, study and preach the word. They did not achieve true religious freedom until the middle 1800's. The Reformation (Protestant Reformation) 4  Beloved, prior to 1517 Europe was largely Roman Catholic and held to the universalism of the Catholic church both in religion and in secular and political power as well. On October 31, 1517, a major backlash to the Roman Catholic church began from within its own ranks when Martin Luther, a German monk and Catholic priest, posted his Ninety-Five Theses on the door of the Castle Church in Wittenberg Germany. One of the major things Luther protested against was the church's selling of indulgences, where money was paid to the Roman Catholic church and in exchange they pardoned your sin. They had salesmen in the Roman Catholic church that went around and sold these indulgences. Guess what they were building at the time? St. Peter's Basilica at Vatican City. It was a great sin to build that monstrosity which they are so proud of! Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as saith the prophet (Acts 7:48). God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands (Ac 17:24). The word "Protestant" comes from the Latin word: potestans, which means one who protests. Beloved, when things become so stinky, and filthy and errorridden, and wrong, the only thing you can do is protest. That is what we do and that is what the Protestant Reformers of the 1500's did. The Protestant Reformation was a broad movement that took place over more than a hundred years The Reformation was led by Martin Luther (Lutheranism), 5  John Calvin, John Knox (Presbyterianism), and others. Luther and Calvin were the leading visionaries of the movement. Luther believed that man was not saved by his own works. The Roman Catholics taught and teach that through praying, fasting and whipping yourself more mercilessly, you could be saved. Luther said salvation was bestowed as a gift from God through faith in Christ. For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast (Eph. 2:89). He denied the supremacy of the pope (Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God Joh 13:3); he denied that you could buy your way out of hell (the rich man was in hell and he couldn't buy his way out - Luke 16:22; For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out - 1 Tim. 6:7); he said the Scriptures were the only authority on religious matters (Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, not the power of God ­ Mat. 22:29); he denied the free will of man; he translated the New Testament from Latin to German so people had more access to the Bible; and he believed the clergy could marry (Titus 1:6), which he did. He said he never wanted to start his own religion and denied any follower of him should be called a Lutheran, saying the only proper name for a follower of Christ was a Christian. Calvin believed in the separation of civil and religious government; that people are solely saved by the grace of God through faith and not of works; that the Scriptures are the basis for all Christian teachings; that all people should be allowed to study and read the Bible; that only the Elect are saved (Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth ­ Is. 42:1); he believed in predestination; he believed the Lord's Supper and Baptism were the only two ordinances; and he believed in the doctrines of Grace ­ TULIP ­ total depravity, unconditional election, limited design in the atonement, irresistible grace and perseverance of the saints. You know we have a lot of verses we could 6  put here on each of these topics. These principles of Luther and Calvin are sometimes called "reformists theology." Out of the Reformation came most forms of Christianity other than Catholicism including the Lutherans, Presbyterians, Baptists, Anabaptists, Methodist, etc. Reformist's theology would eventually spread across Europe, into America and across the world. Anabaptists Another group of people the Catholics terrorized were the Anabaptist. They generally became well known in the 1500-1600's during the reformation. The name is derived from the Greek term anabaptista or "one who baptizes over again." It is a name given to those who reject infant-baptism. The Westboro Baptist Church is Anabaptist. When a person comes to their congregation they re-baptize that person because: 1) infant baptism is by sprinkling and baptism by immersion is the only form of baptism in the Bible (And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both in the water, both Philip and eunuch; and he baptized him ­ Acts 8:38); and, 2) the only time baptism is done in the Bible is when a person has made a public profession of their faith and a desire to be baptized. There is not a single example of an infant being baptized in the Bible. The enemies of the Anabaptists called them this. They rejected the term because they are not "re-baptizing" anyone. Infant baptism is unscriptural and therefore null and void. Thus, this is in fact the first true baptism. Anabaptists are sometimes associated with a specific group of people in Germany in the 16th century that were sometimes called a radical wing of the Protestant reformation. Generally, the term Anabaptists refers to anyone that does not believe in infant baptism. The Anabaptists also generally believed that government should stay out of religious affairs and it is said their beliefs led to the separation of church and state. At times, Anabaptists were persecuted by both the Catholics and Protestants that believed in infant baptism. Because the Anabapitsts were not satisfied with the Protestant Reform 7  efforts (including infant baptism, which Luther, the Church of England and many of the Puritans believed in), they withdrew from those groups and formed their own churches. Church of England (Anglicans) In 1534 the English Parliament, at the behest of Henry VIII, passed the Act of Supremacy which made the English monarch (Henry VIII) the head of the church of England. This was done for the sole reason to facilitate his desire to commit adultery. The church of England is sometimes referred to as the Anglian church. The word "Anglican" originates in ecclesia anglicana which is a medieval Latin phrase meaning English church. Once Henry VIII was made head of the church of England he divorced (or annulled) his marriage to Catherine of Aragon and married Anne Boleyn. Thou shalt not commit adultery (Ex. 20:14). In 1553 Mary I, also known as "Bloody Mary," restored the Roman Catholic church as the religion of England. She was the only surviving child of the Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon, and she never agreed with her father's break from the Roman Catholics. She was called "Bloody Mary" due to her executions of the Protestant reformers. She is the one that had John Bradford executed when he said "but for the grace of God there goes John Bradford." In 1558, after Mary's death, Queen Elizabeth I began to reign. She could not be a Catholic as they did not recognize the marriage of her father to her mother (Anne Boleyn). She, was head of the church of England and with Parliament (who passed the Act of Supremacy of 1558) instituted a moderate form of Protestantism that was known as Anglicanism or the Episcopal church. It was a moderate form in that they still had many vestiges of the Roman Catholic church. Also, in 1558 the Act of Uniformity was passed that forced people to attend Sunday service in an Anglican church. Puritans During Queen Elizabeth's reign the Puritans movement began to grow. The Puritans agreed there should be one national church, but felt the Church of England had only been partially reformed and had too many vestiges of the 8  Roman Catholics including too much "popish ceremony." They also hated the dictate of the Common Prayer book and they wanted to change the church governance structure to be more like the Bible. The Stuart rulers generally refused the reforms the Puritans wanted except that James I agreed to a new translation of the Bible, which came in 1611. Other than this, they were generally blocked from changing the church from within and were severely restricted in tough laws that controlled the practice of their religion. In 1648 the Puritans came to political power in England after the English Civil War (the Puritan Revolution) which included the execution of Charles I (Thou shalt not kill). Interestingly, John Owen (so called "nonconformist Puritan" and paedobaptist (infant baptizer), preached before Parliament the day after Charles I's execution. He was also associated with Oliver Cromwell (a Puritan and "Roundhead") who took control of the English government. In 1660 the Puritans lost political control of England after Cromwell's death. The Puritans were largely religious and did many things the populace hated such as closing theaters and heavily regulating everyday life. After ten years of their modest ways, the English people had had enough. During the Restoration in 1660, political control was given back to the Stuart monarch and Charles II, who was not too happy that the Puritans had cut his father's head off. Charles II was popularly known as the Merry Monarch in reference to the hedonism of his court, particularly as opposed to the Puritans who were very strict. He exacted revenge on the Puritans by passing legislation such as: 1) The Act of Uniformity 1662, which required the use of the Book of Common Prayer for all religious rites and ceremonies (about 2,500 Puritan clergy left the church of England over this); 2) Noncomformists Act 1665 (Five Mile Act), it forbade clergymen from living within five miles of a parish from which they had been expelled, unless they swore an oath to: never resist the king, never attempt to alter the government of church or state and swear to obey the Book of Common Prayer; and, 9  3) The Conventicle Act of 1664, which forbad religious assemblies of more than five people outside the Church of England. A number of Puritans left England for the American colonies hoping to find more religious freedom there. A second group of Puritans called Separatists (i.e., the Pilgrims) believed they had to separate from the church of England because it could not be reformed enough to be truly godly. The Puritan beliefs including those in America were largely what we have already talked about in terms of following Luther, Calvin and the Protestant Reform. They generally believed in the Doctrines of Grace, predestination, the importance of preaching, and praying and studying the Bible. They did not believe: "God loved everyone;" man's freewill; fancy ornate churches; idols/images/artwork; divorce; adultery; fornication; sodomy and no Christmas. One of the sources I used to research this said "the Puritans were so strict they did not even celebrate Christmas." By the way, my Charles Haddon Spurgeon spy, says Spurgeon made fun of the Puritans in a sermon because they refused to celebrate Christmas. Shut up Mr. Spurgeon please, you were too prideful in your wanting to be popular in your day including you preaching to Queen Victoria and such. The Puritans had that correct and how you could miss it, is beyond me. Christ wasn't popular Mr. Spurgeon and you have a little too much Arminianism in you for my tastes. The Puritans believed in living simple, peaceful lives and generally held that if a practice was not found in the Bible, then it should be eliminated. They generally placed the church and God at the center of their lives. Literacy rates were high among the Puritans because Bible reading was an important aspect of their lives. The Puritans believed in hard work and education and started Harvard and Yale (God forbid). The Puritans were superstitious however, which led to the Salem witch trials in 1692 in Salem Massachusetts where 19 women were killed as "witches" (thou shalt not kill). Many Puritans also believed in infant baptism since this was the practice in the Church of England. Some "Puritans" or "Protestants" in America were "Presbyterian" in their form of church government which meant they were led by a representative assembly of elders (i.e. a board of directors as it were). Just to clarify, some of you know that the word "presbytery" is used in the New Testament at I Tim 4:14 Neglect not the gift that 10  is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. That word "presbytery" in that verse refers to the group of elders or pastors in the church and not a separate autonomous body of decisions makers. According to Strong's "Presbyter" is just another word for elder. Also, in the purest sense, true "Puritans" were part of the Church of England and believed in governance by Bishops. Pilgrims (Separatists) The separatists Pilgrims in particular (but also some Puritans and other denominations that settled there) were "congregationalists" in their form of church government which meant each congregation independently and autonomously runs its own affairs and the church or assembly as a whole votes on the direction of that assembly. The Westboro Baptist Church has a congregationalist form of church government. The congregationalist form of government has nothing to do with that godless church on Huntoon called the United Church of Christ Central Congregational. The Pilgrims were deeply opposed to the Episcopalian form of church governance which have a hierarchy of bishops that rule the larger church (the same as the Catholics). The Pilgrims of Plymouth grew rather slowly and by 1640 they had only 2,000 people there versus, 20,000 Puritans at Massachusetts Bay. One of my sources said "over the next centuries the Puritans changed and became less strict." It means they departed from the truths of God they had. America has fallen tremendously since those days, when they at least had some things right. The Puritans were generally more comfortable with the connection between government and religion (due to their roots in the Church of England), but as America evolved the Puritans, Pilgrims, Baptists and other reformers remembered the inquisitions of the Catholics, Bloody Mary, the persecution of the Puritans and nonconformists in England and the mistreatment of the Waldenses and Anabaptists at the hands of government and this led to the passage of the First Amendment to the Constitution that guaranteed religious liberty and no national 11  religion. Without the benefit of the First Amendment we would have lost Snyder v. Phelps, and be far more open to outright discrimination and persecution than we already are. We take this for granted but we should not. Fifty-four people in France were charged with hate speech crimes for tweets and social media posting in the wake of the Charlie Hebdo attack. But for the grace of God there go I. Hypocritical pope Francis the Ashamed said in the wake of Charlie Hebdo publishing a picture of Mohammed on their front cover, you cannot provoke or insult the religion of others. He has zero Bible for that. Was it a sin for Elijah to provoke the prophets of Baal; Stephen to chastise the Jews; Jesus and John the Baptist to chew out the Pharisees and Sadducees; Paul to chastise the men of Ephesus for worshipping Diana of the Ephesians or the men of Athens for their superstition; and Moses for rebuking Jannes and Jamborees? For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers...whose mouths must be stopped (Titus 1:1011). In addition, Mr. Pope, for a thousand years the popes not only insulted other religions, they brutally murdered for it, which they had no right to do, because the weapons of our warfare are not carnal. Was that an awful sin those popes committed Mr. Pope Francis? Baptists The Baptists established a Baptist church in America in 1639 in Providence Rhode Island. They were a part of the English nonconformists, and Protestant Reform movement including the Anabaptists. They believe in baptism by immersion and rejected infant baptism. They played a smaller part, at least initially in the creation of the U.S. but by 1800 they were one of the largest denominations in America. Here are the takeaways:  This country was overwhelmingly founded by a bunch of Calvinists;  The modern spin on Christianity (God loves everyone, freewill, love the sinner hate the sin, etc.) is just that, a modern invention, not found in the Bible and not believed by the forerunners of the Protestant churches.  Protestant means to Protest.  When you see any Protestant church, know that it had its beginnings in Luther, Calvin, the doctrines of grace, and predestination; and that they have departed 12  from that great light they once had and have moved the ancient landmarks Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set (Prov. 22:28).  The Roman Catholic church is utterly corrupt. You cannot build something godly upon a millennial foundation of murder, torture, rape, lying, stealing, cheating, fornication and sodomy, and smell like a rose. Abstain from all appearance of evil (1Th 5:22). The current pope and all prior popes should be charged in the International Criminal Court at the Hague with genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. This isn't hyperbole, I am totally serious. This world may have winked at the crimes of the Roman Catholic church, but they are fresh in God's mind.  In the providence of and sovereignty of God, He founded this country 400 years ago with unique experiences that led to the passage of the First Amendment and religious protection 400 years later when we need it.  Labels, history and all such things are not important. What is important beloved is that we serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: For our God is a consuming fire (Heb. 12:28-29). I love you all. Amen. 13  
