Sunday, June 30, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  Bible compendium on the subject of love for the brethren:  "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34, 35.)  "Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins." (Prov. 10:12)  "Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven." (Matt. 18:21-22.)  Barnes: "To forgive is to treat as though the offence was not committed. To declare that we will not harbor malice, or treat unkindly, but that the matter should be buried and forgotten." Calvin: "It is necessary to the preservation of peace, both within and without, to pass by injuries, without reckoning how often; to forgive, and forget. God multiplies his pardons, and so should we."  "But he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath." (Ps. 78:38.)  "Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honour preferring one another." (Rom. 12:10.)  Gill: "Saints should think honourably of one another, and entertain an honourable esteem of each other; yea, should esteem each other better then themselves; and not indulge evil surmises, and groundless jealousies of one another, which is contrary to that love that thinks no evil." "But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, ...by kindness, ...by love unfeigned." (2 Cor. 6:4,6.)  UNFEIGNED: Without dissimulation; without hypocrisy; undisguised; sincere. Gill on Kindness: "Gentleness, sweetness of temper and manners, affability and courteousness." "I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, With all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love." (Eph. 4:1-2.) Gill: "Overlooking the infirmities of one another, forgiving injuries done, sympathizing with, and assisting each other in distressed circumstances." "And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." (Eph. 4:32.) Gill: "And be ye kind one to another, Good, affable, courteous; which appears in looks, words, and actions; by looking pleasantly on each other, speaking kindly to one another, and mutually doing every good office that lies in their way, and in their power. Tenderhearted: which is opposed to a being hard hearted to them that are in distress, and close at hand to the needy; to  Sunday, June 30, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  cruelty and severity to such who are subject to them, or have injured them; and to a rigid and  censorious spirit to them that are fallen;" Barnes on Tenderhearted: "Having a heart disposed  to pity and compassion, and especially disposed to show kindness to the faults of erring brethren."  "Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves." (Phil. 2:2-3.)  Gill: "Where there is lowliness of mind, or true humility, a person will esteem himself less than the least of all saints; and, will prefer their experience, light, and knowledge, to his own; and will readily give way, when he sees such that are of longer standing, of greater experience, and more solid judgment, as he has reason to think, than himself, are on the other side of the question; and so peace, love, and unity, are preserved."  "Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another..." (Col. 3:12-13.)  Gill: "Which is this inward, tender, unfeigned, and abundant mercy put into act and exercise." Gill on Meekness: "Which shows itself in not envying the gifts and graces, the usefulness and happiness of others, but rejoicing therein." Matthew Henry on Forgiving one another: "Where there is so much corruption in our hearts, and so much occasion of difference and contention, quarrels will sometimes happen, even among the elect of God, who are holy and beloved. But it is our duty to forgive one another in such cases; not to bear any grudge, but put up with the affront and pass it by. And the reason is: Even as Christ forgave you, so also do you."  "And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even your Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints." (1 Thess. 3:12-13.)  "Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned." (1 Tim. 1:5.)  Barnes: "The love which is genuine must proceed from a holy heart. The commandment was not designed to secure merely the outward expressions of love, but that which had its seat in the heart." Gill: "That charity of love, from a heart sprinkled from an evil conscience by the blood of Christ, is love without dissimulation, which is not in tongue and words only, but in deed and in truth, it is an unfeigned love, or loving with a pure heart fervently." JFB: "Love, the sum and end of the law and of the Gospel alike, and that wherein the Gospel is the fulfillment of the spirit of the law in its every essential jot and tittle."  "And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works." (Heb. 10:24.)  Gill: "Provoke to brotherly love, to stir it up, and stir up to it, which is apt to wax cold, that so it may be rekindled, and give a most vehement flame; for this is Christ's new commandment, the bond of perfection, the evidence of regeneration, that which makes the saints' communion comfortable and delightful, and without which a profession of religion is in vain."  Sunday, June 30, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Let brotherly love continue." (Heb. 13:1.)  Gill: "The Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions add, `in you,' or among you, as a church and society of Christians. It is active labor; and shows itself in praying with and for one another; in bearing one another's burdens; in forbearing and forgiving one another; in admonishing one another in love; in building up each other in the most holy faith; and in stirring up one another to the several duties of religion; and without this excellent and useful grace, a profession of religion is in vain."  "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." (1 Pet. 1:22.) "Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous." (1 Pet. 3:8.) "And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sins. (1 Pet. 4:8.) Gill: "Since charity, or true love, thinks no ill, but puts the best constructions upon the words and actions of fellow Christians, and does not take them up, and improve and exaggerate them, but lets them lie buried in oblivion; it takes no notice of injuries, offences, and affronts, but overlooks them, bears with them, and forgives them, so that they are never raked up, and seen any more; which prevents much scandal, strife, and trouble." "Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." (1 Pet. 5:5-6.)  Humility: A feeling of insignificance, inferiority, subservience, low in rank/importance/status, courteously respectful. Gill on this: "Clothed with Humility - in being content with the lowest place, and patiently bearing the greatest contempt; always acknowledging his own meanness, baseness, and unworthiness, ascribing all he is, and has, to the grace and goodness of God." Matthew Henry says: "Humility is the great preserver of peace and order in all Christian churches, consequently pride is the great disturber of them, and the cause of most dissensions and breaches in the church." Gill: "All members of the church should submit themselves to their pastor and fellow members esteeming each other better than themselves, and not be tenacious of their own way of thinking and judging of things, doing the meanest services for the good of each other."  "Add to your faith... brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." (2 Pet. 1:5,7.) "In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother. For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. (1 John 3:10-11.) "Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow that which is good, both among  Sunday, June 30, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  yourselves, and to all men. Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every thing  give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you."  (1 Thes. 5:14-15.)  "Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised is wisdom." (Prov. 13:10.)  If everyone has great humility there will be no contention.  "God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble." (James 4:6.)  "For they that have used the office of a deacon (or a helper) I say, if they use that well, purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus." (1 Tim. 3:13.)  Gill says: "For they that have used the office of a deacon well, &c.] With diligence and faithfulness, with simplicity and cheerfulness; taking good care of the minister and poor, and of the discipline of God's house: purchase to themselves a good degree; not an higher office, as that of presbytery to serve a hierarchy; nor a degree in glory and happiness hereafter; but rather an increase of gifts and grace; or a degree of respect and honour in the church: or the sense is, they possess and enjoy, which is the meaning of the word rendered `purchase,' a very honourable office in the church; and which is so to them, they using it well, and discharging it in an honourable manner; and great boldness in the faith, which is in Christ Jesus: either in the exercise of the grace of faith at the throne of grace; or in asserting the doctrine of faith before men; and in reproving either for error or immorality: all which may be boldly done by those who use this office well."  "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:" (Matt. 6:19-20.)  "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." (Isa. 57:15.)  "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was. But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:19-27.)  I love you. Amen.  
