Sermon to the Saints at Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka, Kansas, on September 7, 2014 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness. (Genesis 1:1-4). For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. (2 Corinthians 4:6) [This sermon borrows liberally from credible Bible commentators] Good morning beloved of the Lord. We recently were having an important discussion in this Church and we were brought to discussing the darkness that we have been delivered from, which deliverance is the source of great thanksgiving among our members. For 59+ years Westboro Baptist Church has preached pure gospel truth in the earth to every creature which is under heaven; "strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness; giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet [fit] to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light: who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell; and, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his Page 1 of 10  sight: if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven." (Colossians 1:11-23). Only God's elect are supernaturally delivered from the power of darkness. Only God's elect are translated into the kingdom of his dear Son. Note that the only true ground for lasting thanksgiving on the part of any member of Adam's race is to be delivered by that almighty power of God from the power of darkness and to be simultaneously translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son which is also here called the kingdom of light. Beside this, every other cause or ground for human thanksgiving is trivial. We live in a world of people who are unthankful and unholy. 2 Ti 3:1-2: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy". The 7.3 Billion people on the earth have no rational basis to give enlightened or intelligent thanks unto the Father, because they have never been made fit to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, and they have never been delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son. Thus this world is a population of profoundly unthankful people. The time has come spoken of by Isaiah the prophet: "For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the peoples." Isaiah 60:2. Profound, thick, dense, impenetrable darkness; which is the meaning of the word "gross"; covers this world and covers the people of this world. Darkness speaks emblematically of sinister ignorance, cruelty and great evil. And those words are descriptive of the people who inhabit this current world. Their characters are stamped, and their foreheads are branded with a remarkable kind of sinister ignorance, cruelty and great evil. There is no fear of God in this evil age. (Genesis 20:11). A similar passage is found in Acts 26:18: "To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified" ­ or separated from the corrupt mass of mankind. So, the power of darkness is the substantial equivalent of the power of Satan; the expressions are virtually synonymous. Scripture shows the following: that Satan was once an Angel of light but is now darkness itself; and is reserved in chains of darkness. He is a ruler of the darkness of this world. His kingdom is a kingdom of darkness. And, he blinds the minds of them that believe not the truth; keeps them in darkness; and increases the natural darkness of their minds by a satanic supernatural enhancement of that natural darkness of the mind with which they Page 2 of 10  were born. And he delights in the works of darkness, and tempts mankind to them. And, his everlasting state and portion will be blackness of darkness forever. Moreover, Satan's power over mankind in an unregenerate state, which he usurps, and which he is allowed to exercise, is very great indeed. He works effectually in them and leads them captive at his will, or to do his will. And, nothing less than the power of God, who is stronger than this strong man armed, can deliver out of his hands. With the ancient Jews, one of the very names of Satan is "darkness." This darkness of sin, ignorance and unbelief surrounds mankind in his natural state, and in this darkness mankind is shut up or imprisoned, so that he has not the least spark of true spiritual light and knowledge. And, this power of darkness spoken of in this verse is to such a degree that natural man knows nothing of God in Jesus Christ, knows nothing of the true way of salvation in Jesus Christ or the work of the Spirit on the souls of God's elect, or of the doctrines of the gospel of free grace in an experimental manner. And, so all mankind continues in the darkness of abject ignorance of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ until by an almighty power they are turned from darkness to light. When by powerful grace they are plucked as brands out of the burning fire, and delivered from the wrath to come, and from that utter darkness of ignorance, sin, superstition and idolatry that their ways of sin and cruelty have led and exposed them to. This deliverance is wrought out for them in the effectual calling, when they are internally called, and powerfully brought out of this state of darkness by introducing light into them, revealing Christ in them, causing the prince of darkness to flee from them, and the scales of darkness and superstition and ignorance and blindness to fall from their eyes; and all this is at once an instance of the amazing grace of God and the almighty power of God. (1 Corinthians 4:7: "For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?" Who maketh thee to differ from another? God Almighty is the one who has commanded the light to shine out of darkness and to shine in the hearts of his elect people to give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. (2 Corinthians 4:6). The image of Jesus Christ. Romans 8:29: "For whom he did foreknow [--know with love and approbation--], he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.") The Father is who hath delivered us from the power of darkness and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. Colossians 1:13. Page 3 of 10  A somewhat similar verse is found in Luke 22:53, where Christ says: "but this is your hour, and the power of darkness." The Persic version reads "the power of your darkness." That is, the power temporarily granted by a sovereign God to evil people in this life; the people who are themselves darkness itself. Born and brought up in darkness, and who walk in darkness all their days and in the ignorance of their mind; and who do the works of darkness all their days; and who shun and resist the light because their deeds are evil. The Ethiopic version renders it, "the power of the Lord of darkness." That is, Satan the malignant spirit who works in and energizes and deceives the non-elect all their days on earth. The Jews used to call the evil angels by this name. They say in their ancient rabbinical writings, the destroying angels are called darkness and thick darkness. And even so it is in today's world of profound spiritual darkness, ignorance, superstition, and idolatry. Sodomites in high places; oppression of the poor; rejection of the truth; drunkenness in high places; and adultery in high places. "And this is the condemnation [--that is, the legal and moral basis for the damnation of the non-elect and the banishment of them forever in hell--], that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God." John 3:19-21. Light in the Scripture is often emblematic of divine truth, which shines forth from God himself through the preaching and disseminating of it at a particular time and place, dispelling the cover of darkness, ignorance, sin and exposing all such for what they are. And everyone that doeth evil hateth that light, neither cometh to that light, lest his deeds should be reproved. John 3:20. And that is precisely why you evil sons of Belial who populate this wicked world hate the message of Westboro Baptist Church; and you hate it with a great and pervasive intensity; and so it has been for 59 years last past. You hate the truth of God because it exposes your adulterous and idolatrous ways of life. You hate the truth of God because it exposes your fondness for fornication and the sins of Sodom: "And the [men of Sodom] called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them." (Genesis 19:5). This is the same "knowing" that is described in Genesis 4:1: "And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain." You hate the truth of God because it exposes your tyranny and your oppression of the poor and your closing of your Godforsaken courts to the supplications of the weak. Hear this word: "Everyone that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved." John 3:20. Page 4 of 10  The symbol for the Waldensians was a small candle shining brightly in darkness with the Latin words "Lux Lucet," meaning "the light shines." It was shorthand for "Lux Lucet En Tenebris"--Latin for "The Light Shines in Darkness." They took that from John 1:5: "And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not." That expression, "the darkness comprehended it not," means literally: the darkness is without power to extinguish that light. The Waldensians were the Baptists of the dark ages in Central Europe. Their beliefs and practices were in all points conformable to the beliefs and practices of the Old School or Primitive Baptists of early America. Many of their sermons are in the library of Westboro Baptist Church. The history of the Waldensians is written in their blood, and a large portion of the book, Fox's Book of Martyrs, is devoted to the Waldensians of Central Europe. And so it ever was and so it is today, here at Westboro Baptist Church: the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehends it not. John 1:5. "That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." John 1:9. Here is the language of exclusivity: this is the true light. That adjective "the" signifies that there is no other light, no other truth of God in the earth. And that adjective "true," in this connection and in this context, signifies that every other socalled religion, so-called light, so-called truth, so-called message, is false; and constitutes damnable heresy. The last half of the verse reads, "which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," which signifies that this divine truth illuminates--shines upon-- every son of Adam bearing its divine credentials in its teeth as it comes. Which is to say that this message that we preach comes upon the human mind with great and profound intellectual and moral force, it strikes the mind with compelling internal and external evidences that it is indeed the exclusive and only word of the living and true God: "The true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." 1 John 1:5-7. "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you." And only those who heartily believe and receive and embrace and thoroughly take this message into intellectual and experimental grasp are the elect of God. And, all the rest kick against these doctrinal pricks. Acts 9:5. The only legitimate basis for Christian fellowship is walking in the light of these divinely revealed doctrines of Grace: the five points of Calvinism. "If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another." Every other so-called Christian fellowship is Page 5 of 10  spurious, a thing of human creation. 1 John 1:6. The message of Westboro Baptist Church is a purifying and an isolating message. It sharply separates the sheep from the goats, the wheat from the tares, and the sincere from the hypocrites. This blessed WBC message affords no options, makes no deals, and tolerates no compromise. The great American agnostic, known as Royal Bob Ingersoll, used to say: "In the republic of mediocrity, genius is dangerous." Even so, in the kingdom and church of the Lord Jesus Christ, sincerity is dangerous. Because the great mass of mankind are phony and insincere and hypocritical; and the thing they hate most in this world are the elect of God and the truth they bear living among them. The members of Westboro Baptist Church are experts on this point and will offer compelling, condemning testimony against 7.3 Billion souls alive with us today. "For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved." John 3:20. Satan is a liar and the deceiver, and therefore he has deluded fallen man into their own system of lights. "Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow." Isaiah 50:1011. "Rejecting Christ the Light of the world, and despising the glorious light of his Gospel, and loving darkness rather than light, set up the light of nature and reason as the rule of faith and practice; or the traditions and doctrines of men to be guided by; or their own righteousness for their justification before God, and acceptance with him." ­ John Gill. These sparks offer no real or lasting source of light or heat and comfort, and are soon extinguished if a spark can happen to generate a small fire, and ultimately the hands that make the sparks wither and fail, and in the end their permanent resting place is hell. A spirit of evil afflicts this world. Even the pride and arrogance and ignorance of ancient Sodom and Gomorrah. The same spirit of ancient Sodom and Gomorrah afflicts this world. And this is the very thing that manifests the damnation and doom of this world. Here is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. (John 3:19). Rather than come to the true light--that is, receive and believe and embrace the truth of God that is preached now and for 59 years last past in this dark world--the political, social, religious, and all other leaders of this evil world pretend that the values of Sodom and Gomorrah are wonderful. "We need no light; we've got enough light; we're wonderful people;" they proudly declare. "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that Page 6 of 10  put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (Isaiah 5:20). And that's exactly what this evil, Godforsaken world does. The basic human values which this world brags about--those which mirror the values of ancient Sodom and Gomorrah--are those that brought down the wrath of God from heaven on them and will bring down His wrath on this dark world. "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Luke 17:28-30). This world is filled with sodomites, whoremongers and adulterers. You ignoramuses have elected them, appointed them, and otherwise allowed them to sit on judge's benches and adjudicate right and wrong for you; and to sit in your legislatures and make your stupid, vain, God-dishonoring laws for you; and to occupy the decision-making and policy-making positions at every level of government for you; and you dare to call it good; and you dare to call it light; and you dare to call it sweet. "Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah. ... And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood." Isaiah 1:10-15. Woe unto them that "justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him!" Isaiah 5:23. You evil people justify the sodomites for reward. You justify the whoremongers for reward. You justify the adulterers for reward. You justify the tyrants that oppress the poor for reward. You justify the drunks for reward. And any and all kinds and forms of wickedness you justify by the simple device of calling good evil, and evil good, and putting darkness for light and light for darkness. Isaiah 5:20. "Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts." Revelation 9:21. "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin." John 15:22. Thus spake Jesus Christ. And so it is with you; you now have no cloke for your sin because now the word of God, the truth of God has been plainly spoken to you. Nevertheless you continue to say, I don't need it. "I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." Revelation 3:17. "Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out with him. The steps of his strength shall be hard, and his own counsel shall cast him down." Job 18:5-7. These verses are an emblematical and poetic way of describing the arrogance of Page 7 of 10  the wicked, the self-deception of the wicked, and the ultimate desolation and doom of the wicked. All of which is a very accurate description of the population of this world. "And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; ... But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; ... [and] unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, [God himself will pour out] indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile." Romans 2:1-9. The evil inhabitants of this evil world have changed the truth of God into a lie, and have worshipped and served the creature more than the creator, who is blessed forever. And, it is for this reason that God has given you up to your vile affections, and has given you over to a reprobate mind. Romans 1:18-20. Yesterday in North Topeka, the leaders of this community doing business as "Topeka Pride," under the lying banner that they just want everyone to be accepted, gathered to offer praise, honor and thanksgiving to the culture of ancient Sodom & Gomorrah. They promised live entertainment: they featured drag queens. They speechified about the glories of alternate lifestyles and diversity and inclusion. "But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us." (Luke 19:14).They promised a new age of enlightenment to overcome the preaching of Westboro Baptist Church. But darkness covers Topeka and gross darkness the people thereof. Even so bright light shined forth at the intersection of Quincy and Gordon where sparkling Gospel messages were displayed: "Topeka Kansas: Sodom City"; "God Hates Pride"; "Sin and Shame Not Pride"; "God Hates Fags"; "Why Did God Destroy Sodom?"; "No Fags in Heaven"; and the "Lord is Coming!" Ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, they did not read or if they read, they did not comprehend the memo: "the darkness is without power to extinguish that light." Thank God and Amen. But for the grace and power of God we too would be consumed by that darkness. Remember my primary text that God has delivered us from the power of darkness. Colossians 1:12. "And God said, Let there be light: and there was light." Genesis 1:3. Page 8 of 10  "And the LORD went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night." Exodus 13:21. "And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it." Exodus 25:37. "Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul?" Job 3:20. "Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in?" Job 3:23. Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living. (Job 33:29-30) You know that there is a of words about light in the book of Psalms, but I give a sampling: Psalm 18:28 "For thou wilt light my candle: the LORD my God will enlighten my darkness." Psalm 27:1 "A Psalm of David. The LORD is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the LORD is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?" Psalm 36:9 "For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light." Psalm 97:11 "Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart." Psalm 119:105 "NUN. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path." Psalm 119:130 "The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple." Among David's last words, under the influence of the Spirit of God, he testified of this light: "And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain. Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow." 2 Samuel 23:4-5. Page 9 of 10  A learned writer has observed, that in an ancient manuscript the word "Jehovah" is inserted and reads thus, "and as the light of the morning, when Jehovah the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; ..." [Dr. Kennicott's State of the Hebrew Text, Dissert. 1. p. 468.] "But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day." (Proverbs 4:18) The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. (Isaiah 9:2). "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the LORD shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising." Isaiah 60:1-3. Now you know that I could go on for an hour just quoting Bible verses about this blessed and wonderful light, a kingdom of light, but I will conclude with Revelation's last three verses on this light of which I speak: Revelation 21:23-24 "And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it." Revelation 22:5 "And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever." I love you. Amen. Page 10 of 10  
