Sunday, May 11, 2014 2Timothy 3:16 "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works." "Inspiration of God" means "God breathed" - that is to say that He is the author; he spoke the words, and the men writing them down were merely the scribes. Romans 15:4 "For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope." Psalm 138:2 "I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name." Isa 8:20 "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." 2Peter 1:19 ­ 2Peter 2:2 "We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of." Matthew 5: 18 For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. My topic this morning is the scriptures. The scriptures are inspired by God, they are perfect and they are infallible, and they will most assuredly be fulfilled. They are the plumb line to which we are to compare all things in our lives. We are to study them diligently, and seek the Lord for the Holy Spirit to open them to us, for our learning,  comfort, and admonition. The scriptures are consistent with themselves, and when we see something that appears inconsistent, then it must be reconciled with Scripture, seeing that the Scriptures are not open to private interpretation. Given their importance, one of Satan's chief devices is to take aim at corrupting the words themselves, creating false doctrines in the name of God, such that confusion reigns, and nothing is discernible or dependable; this has been his game since the Garden of Eden. Matthew 24:23,24 "Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect." But alas, it is not possible to deceive the elect, because the Holy Spirit has come unto us, and leads us into all truth. We must seek him, beloved, that we be not deceived. The Lord has preserved his Word in the earth - how extremely blessed we are, that we have a dependable version of it in our native tongue! Praise God for that miraculous work! Today I would like to give you a glimpse into the history of the Scriptures, and how we come to have them in their current form, as I believe it to be instructive on many fronts. Keep the following in mind as we take this little journey, today:  This information only scratches the surface of the spiritual war that has raged for thousands of years over the words, but it will give you a good overview, and a feel for the fierceness of the conflict.  You will see that there are two streams of Manuscripts over the last 2000 years. Only one of these streams can contain living water. The streams are the Alexandrian Text (Minority Text) which feeds the Catholic Whore; and the Byzantine Text (Majority Text) which culminates in the KJV translation. Grievous wolves have circled around both of these texts - it is a continual miracle that the Scriptures have not been corrupted.  I believe that the Scriptures were infallibly delivered in their original writing, and that they have been preserved in their original languages (Hebrew and Greek), as they were delivered.   I do not believe, nor do the scriptures promise, that there will be a word-forword infallible translation in every language. They will be preserved and fulfilled "jot and tittle", not translated into every language on earth "jot and tittle".  I believe that the King James Version of the Bible is a gift from God, as it is the best translation in our language of the original Greek and Hebrew, and the culmination of the English translations of the Majority Text. Every translation after it comes from a corrupt root, as you will soon see. However, I believe it to be an idolatrous, satanic distraction to chase after the notion that KJV is a wordfor-word, divinely inspired, infallible work. There are many in this world that have made a religion out of that new doctrine. If something in KJV doesn't reconcile with the scriptures, then it is incumbent upon us to look to the original words! The KJV translators say as much in the preface to their own work.  1500 ­ 400 BC: Old Testament is written ­ mainly in Hebrew, small amount of Aramaic. o Beginning with the writings of Moses ("The Law")  Nearly 2000 years of history given to Moses directly from God o These writings were kept by the Levites, and eventually housed in the Temple  Maintaining these documents was of utmost importance to the Jews  The Scribes were entrusted with the maintaining and copying of these documents  They developed an intricate method for copying the scriptures, to ensure that no errors occurred. o Must be copied one letter at a time o When a page was completed, it was validated by the author, plus three others, each looking at a different aspect (counting letters, sentences, etc) o Any erroneous copy was destroyed  Other writings were added to the canon and maintained by these men as directed by the Holy Spirit  Each King was to write a copy of the Bible in their own hand ­ Deut. 17:18  400 BC: The Old Testament books, as we know them, are said to have been collected into their canonized form by Ezra, who was a scribe. (See attached: Hebrew Scriptures)  200 BC: The Septuagint is said to have been written in Alexandria, Egypt o Greek translation of the entire Old Testament canon, in order to accommodate the fact that many of the scattered Jews were now speaking Greek o Performed by seventy Jewish scholars o "Apocryphal" books appear to have originated in this version, originally written in Greek. Apocryphal meaning "hidden" or "secret". These are books whose antiquity is undoubted, but not considered as divinely inspired. (See attached: Old Testament Comparisons)  33 AD: Jesus Christ is crucified, buried, and resurrected. o Jesus Christ confirms the Old Testament canon  Luke 24:44,45 "And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures."   Law, Prophets and Psalms (Writings) are the 3 parts of the Jewish scripture to this day. There are many other spots where Jesus references the Law and the Prophets, which is shorthand for the whole of the Scriptures.  Jesus quotes directly from 24 books of the Old Testament.  New Testament writers include 195 direct Old Testament quotes, spanning 36 of the 39 books.  The Apocrypha is not quoted once in the New Testament  The Apocrypha conflicts with other Scriptures  Jesus did not include it by reference (Law +Prophets + Psalms = Old Testament only)  30-100 AD: New Testament is written in Greek o These writings were immediately accepted by Christians, because the Apostles credentials were evident, in that the Lord confirmed their words with miracles similar to those that Christ performed. Hebrews 2:3,4 o As the Aaronic priesthood was entrusted with the preservation of the Old Testament, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, so the New Testament was entrusted to the Royal Priesthood of the saints of God ­ all of the members of the universal body being Kings and Priests.  90 AD: Jewish elders reject the Septuagint, as it gives the gentile Christians the ability to argue OT scripture with the Jews. o Jews also reject the Apocrypha as not a part of the canon. o Jewish scribes continue to maintain the Old Testament in Hebrew. o Eventually maintained by a group of Jews called the Masoretes  The Masoretic Text (Copies still exist from 1000AD) matches with the Dead Sea Scrolls (Dating back to 200 BC)  Consistent with Romans 3:2 that the Oracles of God were committed to the Jews.  100 AD: John the Apostle is said to have assembled the New Testament canon.  100-400 AD: With the Apostles now dead, and their gifts having ceased, major portions of the early Christian church gradually apostatize into strange doctrine, and consolidate into an unscriptural hierarchy which would alter and begin to violently control the words of the Gospel. o Paul warned of this: Acts 20:29,30 "For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them." o Independent churches began to organize into informal groups, eventually giving formal authority to five "Episcopal Sees" (center of authority), each headed by a bishop. o Rome was the Western See o Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem, and Alexandria were the Eastern Sees o Rome asserted dominance as the "First among equals", eventually claiming all authority under the title of Pope, somewhere between 400 and 600 AD. o The Eastern Sees eventually disappeared with the exception of Constantinople, which became the center of the Greek Orthodox church. o A line of manuscripts begins to develop which carries corrupt doctrine, including:  Denying the deity of Christ:  The Trinity is a hierarchy, and Jesus Christ is a created being  Denying Christ's bodily resurrection  Free will  Penance  Perpetual virginity and sinlessness of Mary  240 AD: Some of these doctrines are held by Origen of Alexandria  o Wrote a critical revision of the Septuagint called the Hexapla  313 AD: Constantine, Emperor of the western Roman provinces, joins with Licinius, Emperor of the eastern provinces, to sign the edict of Milan, granting acceptance of Christianity. o This largely stopped the intense persecution of Christians in the West; not in the East o His efforts over the following 24 years greatly increase the power of the Catholic church  324 AD: Constantine conquers Licinius, and becomes the sole Emperor of Rome  325 AD: Council of Nicea ­ called by Constantine to settle growing disputes in the "Church", including the deity of Christ, Easter, and the growing disparity amongst copies of New Testament manuscripts o Those who didn't agree to the declarations of the council were "anathematized" and banished. o Constantine, seeking a unified text, ordered 50 copies of an official text to be made o Eusebius was in charge of this effort  330 AD: Constantine establishes the capital of the empire at Byzantium, which he renames in honor of himself: Constantinople. o He intends to make Constantinople the center of the Catholic church, instead of Rome  397 AD: Synod of Carthage formally codifies scriptural canon o The canon was already widely accepted by this time o 27 NT book, 39 OT books, plus the Apocryphal books, which were to be included for historical and instructional purposes only, not for doctrine.  404 AD: Jerome completes the Vulgate Latin translation of the Bible o Commissioned in 382 by Damascus I, the Bishop of Rome o He was a monk, a priest (that didn't practice), and a candidate to replace Damascus as Bishop of Rome o Translated and compiled from many sources, including the revised Septuagint of Origen (Hexapla), and the manuscripts created by Eusebius o He believed in the hierarchical church, and the authority of Rome o He put forth the doctrine of Mary's perpetual virginity o Ironically, he strongly believed that the Bible should be available to all people in their native language o He was later declared a Saint by the Catholic church o The Vulgate Latin translation remains the primary Bible for the next 1000 years  500 ­ 1500 AD: The Dark Ages o Called the Dark Ages for various reasons, but for the servants of God, it is primarily dark because of the ever tightening noose of the Roman Catholic Church around the European continent, and their violent suppression of the Scriptures and enforcement of Catholic doctrine  Common people don't know Latin, and are denied access to the scriptures in any other language, at pain of imprisonment, torture, or death  Direct access to even the Latin scriptures was denied to the lay people:  Pope Innocent: "As by the old law the beast touching the holy mount was to be stoned to death, so simple and uneducated men were not to touch the Bible or venture to preach it's doctrines."  The Vulgate Latin was declared infallible, to the point that it was declared more accurate than the Greek source. It was to be handled and interpreted only by the clergy. o Doctrinal control ­ these doctrines were enforced on pain of torture and death, particularly through the device of the inquisition:  Universal Church militant  Papal authority  Pope Pius X: "The Pope is not simply the representative of Jesus Christ; on the contrary, he is Jesus Christ himself, under the veil of the flesh. Doth the Pope speak? It is Jesus  Christ who is speaking. Hence when anyone speaks of the Pope, it is not necessary to examine but to obey."  Mary is a perpetual virgin, and is a sinless intercessor to Christ  Adoration of Saints  Transubstantiation  Penance, rather than repentance  Salvation by works, not by faith  Free Will  Infant baptism  Purgatory  Indulgences  Catholic tradition is on par with Scripture o Waldenses / Albagenses ­ two of the names by which the servants of God were known during this time. These people were fiercely persecuted and killed for their faithful testimony.  There was a concerted effort to destroy their Scriptures and literature with them, so that it couldn't spread o 1384 AD - John Wycliffe ­ published the Wycliffe Bible  English scholar / Oxford professor  Took aim at the Catholic church, specifically Papal authority, Free Will, and Transubstantiation  "We ought to believe in the authority of no man, unless he say the word of God. That if any man in earth, either angel of heaven teacheth us contrary of holy writ we should flee from him as from the foul fiend of hell and hold us steadfastly to the truth and freedom of the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ."  He translated the Bible from the Vulgate Latin into English, attracting many followers, who would go out in pairs preaching the Gospel in English  Called Lollards (mumblers)  Many of his followers were tried as heretics, and burned at the stake with their Wycliffe Bibles hung around their necks  44 years after his death, he was declared a heretic by the Catholic church, and Anathematized. They dug up his bones, shattered, burned, and threw them in the River Swift.  "We separate this same Wycliffe together with his accomplices from the precious body and blood of the Lord, and from the society of all Christians. We exclude him from our holy mother the church, in heaven and on earth. We declare him excommunicate and anathema. We judge him damned with the devil and his angels and all the reprobates to eternal fire. So be it." o 1453 AD - Fall of Constantinople ­ Captured by the Ottoman empire - Sultan Mehmed II  Eastern Orthodox Christian scholars fled to western Europe, bringing with them an influx of thousands of Greek NT manuscripts (called Byzantine texts).  These scholars begin to teach Greek at Western universities for the first time o 1455 AD ­ Johannes Gutenberg invents a moveable type printing press, allowing for mass production of books  Gutenberg Bible was a printing of the Vulgate Latin version  Previously it took 10 months or more to create a copy of the Bible, and cost more than a year's wages  This ability to quickly mass produce books fuels the Protestant Reformation   1516 AD - Desiderius Erasmus ­ Dutch humanist, scholar, and Catholic Priest, publishes the New Testament in Greek. o Having become an expert in Latin, and Greek (learned at the University of Paris, under the instruction of George Hermonymus, a recent Byzantine refugee), he was determined to revise the Vulgate Latin edition of the Bible, which was in bad shape from sloppy copying over the years.  "But one thing the facts cry out, and it can be clear, as they say, even to a blind man, that often through the translator's clumsiness or inattention the Greek has been wrongly rendered; often the true and genuine reading has been corrupted by ignorant scribes, which we see happen every day, or altered by scribes who are half-taught and half-asleep" o As he undertook that work, he came to realize that there were serious errors in Jerome's translation, as compared to the Greek manuscripts that he had. These errors propped up Catholic doctrine. E.g.:  Repent or perish was translated as "Do penance" or perish, propping up works righteous, and human intercessor doctrines.  Luke 1:28 KJV: "And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. " Jerome translated it as "Hail, O one that is full of grace, the Lord is with you", giving rise to Mariolatry; "Full of grace" meaning that Mary is a reservoir of grace ­ a source of grace that can be accessed through prayer TO Mary, rather than her being an object of grace, like all of God's elect.  Erasmus continued in the Catholic church, supporting the Pope, and many of their heretical doctrines, including free will. o Erasmus published the Greek (compiled from 7 manuscripts) alongside his revised Latin. Others would revise these Greek texts over the years, as more manuscripts became available ­ eventually this would be called the "Textus Receptus", meaning "Received Text" (Received from God), and it would be the basis of most every translation of the Bible for the next 400 years. o Eventually, over 5000 manuscripts would be collected, and 95% of them agree with Textus Receptus, causing it to be known as the "Majority Text".  1517 ­ 1648 AD - The Protestant Reformation o A series of men who "protest" against, and seek to reform the error of Catholic doctrine and practice. Generally, their position is contained in the five solae, each of which directly combats Catholic doctrine:  Sola Scriptura ­ "by scripture alone"  Sola fide ­ "by faith alone"  Sola gratia ­ "by grace alone"  Solus Christus ­ "Christ alone"  Soli Deo Gloria ­ "glory to God alone" o To be clear - the Protestants didn't completely come away from Catholic doctrine, and in some instances turned right around began to persecute and even put to death those that wouldn't go along with their doctrine. The "protestant" churches are shades of Catholic grey. o 1517 AD - Martin Luther, a Catholic monk, nailed his 95 theses - arguing against indulgences ­ to the door of the Catholic Church in Wittenburg Germany, starting a feud that made him an outlaw under a death warrant. o 1522 AD ­ Luther translates the New Testament from Greek (Textus Receptus) into German, while in hiding at Wartburg Castle. At this time he gets more aggressive in his efforts to counter the catholic doctrine, having become fully convinced of Justification by Faith. o 1525 ­ Anabaptist movement begins  Many of the protestants persecute them as vigorously as the Catholics o 1526 - William Tyndale translates the New Testament from Greek (Textus Receptus) into English   He was an Oxford educated linguist, and a Catholic Priest  He confronted a more senior priest several years earlier, who had asserted that "we had better be without God's law than the Pope's". Tyndale's response: "I defy the pope and all his laws. If God spare my life, ere many years, I will cause the boy that drives the plow to know more about the scriptures than thou dost."  He was determined to make an English translation from the Greek. Once his plan was known, the Catholic authorities sought to seize him, so he fled to Germany, where he moved from Cologne, to Worms, to Antwerp over a period of 11 years, translating, publishing, and hiding. His work was smuggled back into England and distributed.  By translating the original Greek words correctly, it directly challenged many of the Catholic doctrines, for example: "overseer" instead of "bishop"; "elder" instead of "priest"; "congregation" rather than "church".  He was eventually betrayed by a trusted friend, and delivered up to be tried and convicted of heresy. He was kept in harsh conditions for 500 days, and then strangled at the stake, before they burned him. His last words were: "Lord, open the King of England's eyes".  He had only finished translating the New Testament and half of the Old Testament. o 1534 ­ Pope Clement VII refuses to annul the marriage of King Henry VIII, causing Henry to institute the Act of Supremacy, which cast off Papal authority, and created the Church of England (Anglican church), of which Henry was the "only supreme head in the earth". o 1535 ­ Myles Coverdale publishes the Coverdale Bible  He finished the work of his friend William Tyndale, by translating the remainder of the Old Testament  This is the first complete Bible to be printed in modern English  The Coverdale Bible was smuggled into England from Switzerland o 1537 ­ John Rogers publishes the Matthews Bible  A revision of Coverdale's Bible  Published under the pseudonym "Thomas Matthews"  The first Bible to be printed in English in England o 1539 ­ The Great Bible is published  Thomas Cromwell convinced Henry VIII to commission an official English Bible  Coverdale was chosen to do the work, which was a revision of his own Bible  Called "The Great Bible" because of its size  Also called "The Chained Bible", because a copy was chained in the sanctuary of each parish of the Church of England ­ so it wouldn't be stolen o 1540 ­ Pope Paul III creates the Jesuit order  Catholics could no longer control the spread of the scriptures into English, nor could they stop the fact that the corruptions of the Vulgate Latin had been exposed. They needed a new approach.  The Jesuits were the "Shock Troops of the Counter Reformation"  They were a secret society that functioned both in violent plots, and infiltration of academia.  The first Superior General was Ignatius of Loyola  The Superior General answered only to the Pope ­ the position came to be known as the "Black Pope" o 1545 - 1563 ­ Pope Paul III convenes the Council of Trent, which meets 25 times  The stated purpose was to give the Protestants a fair hearing on their complaints  No such hearing ever happened   The Council was largely comprised of Jesuits under the cloak of Academia  The result was the affirmation of Catholic doctrine and practice, including that the scriptures were only to be interpreted by the Catholic church, and that the Catholic traditions were on par with Scripture.  The Apocrypha was canonized  The Protestants and their doctrine (including Justification by Faith alone, predestination, and the sovereignty of God) were declared Anathema o 1547 ­ Henry VIII dies, his son Edward VI begins to reign at 9 years old  Edward carries forward the cause of the reformers, giving them safe haven in England  He was sickly, and dies 6 years later  He attempts to keep the throne out of his Catholic sister Mary's hands by appointing his cousin Lady Jane Grey as his successor o 1553 ­ Mary I deposes Jane Grey, 9 days into her reign, and has her beheaded  Mary is an ardent Catholic, and returns England to Papal authority  Hundreds of Protestants are tried for heresy and burned at the stake, causing the new Queen to be known as "Bloody Mary"  Among those killed was John Rogers  800 English Protestants flee from England, including Myles Coverdale and John Knox, many of whom find refuge in Geneva, where John Calvin was a theological and government leader. o 1558 ­ Elizabeth I begins to reign, after the death of Bloody Mary  Elizabeth tries to straddle the Church of England, and the Catholic church. After assassination attempts, and rejection by the Pope, she begins to persecute and put Catholics to death. o 1560 ­ Geneva Bible is published  Written by several protestants gathered at Geneva, including Coverdale, Knox and Calvin  First English Bible where the Old Testament was translated entirely from the original Hebrew  First Bible to include complete Chapter and Verse breakdowns, which would be carried on (with very few changes) to future Bibles  The first English "Study Bible", as it included thousands of commentary notes in the margin. Being outside of the reach of the Church of England, the commentators were free to take on the false doctrines of both the Anglican and Catholic church.  The notes in Revelation call out the Pope as Antichrist  The commentary causes the Geneva Bible to be banned in England during the reign of King Charles I  This Bible gained widespread popularity and use, over 150 editions were printed  Later known as the "Pilgrim Bible", because it was the Bible that the Pilgrims brought to America in 1621. o 1568 ­ Bishops' Bible is published, under the authority of Queen Elizabeth  The Geneva Bible was clearly a superior translation to the Great Bible that was the then official Bible of the Anglican church  Rather than adopt the Geneva Bible (which contained commentary that condemned Anglican practice), the Bishops' Bible was commissioned to be the new official Anglican Bible. o 1582 ­ Rheims Old Testament published by the Catholic church to support the Counter Reformation  English translation of the Old Testament from the Vulgate Latin o 1603 ­ King James I begins to reign in England o 1604 ­ King James Commissions the King James Bible, under pressure from Puritans who took exception with the Bishops' Bible   James influenced the proceedings with a list of rules aimed to protect Anglican practice (See attachment: KJV Translation Instructions)  47 scholars ­ all from the Anglican church ­ undertook the work  Literal translation ­ word for word comparison to the Hebrew / Greek (as opposed to dynamic or paraphrase translations)  Divided into 6 Companies, spread across 3 cities  There was to be 14 word-for-word reviews  Each Company had a section of the Bible  Each team member within the company did a complete translation alone  The Company then compared their work, and resolved any differences  The work of each Company was then reviewed by each of the other Companies  Final revision done by a committee of 12 (top two men from each Company)  The Culmination of the protestant Bibles in the English language o 1605 ­ Guy Fawkes attempts assassination of King James  Fawkes ­ a Catholic, in conspiracy with Jesuits, attempted to blow up Parliament in order to assassinate King James ­ called the Gunpowder Plot. His purpose was to restore Catholic order and control in England.  He was put to death, and is burned in effigy each November 5 in England  Fitting that his face would become synonymous with anarchy, and would be used today as a symbol for those who desire to suppress the preaching of the Gospel. o 1610 ­ Douay New Testament published by the Catholic church to support the Counter Reformation  English translation of the New Testament from the Vulgate Latin  Combined with the Rheims OT to form the Douay-Rheims Bible ­ official Bible of the Catholic church in English. Full of translations aimed to support Catholic doctrine:  Matthew 6:11 ­ "Give us this day our supersubstantial bread"  Jesuit Footnote on Revelation 17:6 ­ "I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints" ­ "Blood of protestants is not the blood of saints ... for the shedding of which, by the order of justice, no commonwealth shall answer." o 1611 ­ King James Bible is published  Goes on to be the de facto standard for the English Bible for the better part of 400 years  The "1611" KJV that we use today is actually the 1769 Revision, which is the 4th Revision (1629, 1638, 1762, 1769). The spelling is modernized, and there are some additional words.  1881 ­ Present: The Minority Text, and Modern Bible translations o 1881 ­ the English Revised Version (of KJV) was published  Brooke Westcott and Fenton Hort convinced the committee to stop using the Majority Text (Textus Receptus), and to begin using the Minority Text.  Minority Text (Also called the Alexandrian Text) consists of 45 manuscripts, with two primary documents whose roots are very clearly rooted in Catholic doctrine, and may have been 2 of the 50 manuscripts that Constantine ordered around 330: o Codex Vaticanus ­ this text is brought forth from the Vatican library in the 15th century. It was missing Half of Genesis, and five chapters of the New Testament, which were then written at the Vatican in the 15th Century. o Codex Sinaiticus ­ Discovered in a wastebasket in St. Catherine's Monastery in Sinai, Egypt in 1845. It has thousands of corrections on it, making it one of the most corrected manuscripts in existence.  o These 2 manuscripts conflict with each other in over 3000 places within the Gospels alone. o Despite the many issues with these texts, they were put forward as the new gold standard, because they were older than most of the Majority Texts.  Age is irrelevant if the root is corrupt.  Westcott and Hort had ulterior motives - they pulled a fast one, and they knew it: o Hort wrote the following to Westcott, while they were in the midst of their work (1861): "Also - but this may be cowardice - I have a sort of craving that our text should be cast upon the world before we deal with matters likely to brand us with suspicion. I mean, a text, issued by men already known for what will undoubtedly be treated as dangerous heresy, will have great difficulties in finding its way to regions which it might otherwise hope to reach, and whence it would not be easily banished by subsequent alarms."  Virtually all modern translations now use the Minority Text as their foundation o New American Standard, New International Version, English Standard Version, New King James, etc. o Hundreds of new translations, all from a corrupt root Modern Bibles begin with a corrupt root, which whittles away at the deity of Christ, the sinfulness of sin, the fires of hell, and the sovereignty of God, and further makes the scriptures inconsistent with themselves. Add to that the degradation of 140 years of dynamic and paraphrase translations, guided by the ever filthier zeitgeist of the day. The result is that the modern Bible is no longer authoritative, but rather consultative and allegorical. Is it any wonder that this generation is on the fast track to hell? Be thankful, my dear friends, that we have not yet resisted unto blood, and that today the Holy Spirit has preserved these words in our language, and we can freely study them, and preach them. Let us ask the Lord to increase our understanding of these blessed words, and cause us to walk in that blessed light. Ecclesiastes 12-14: "And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil." I love you all! Amen  
