Page 1 of 10 Sermon to the Saints of God assembled at Topeka, KS: Sunday, January 11, 2015 I'd like to start with a couple of current events. The first one is the "Gay Christian Conference" up in Oregon ­ it boils my blood to even say "Gay" and "Christian" in the same sentence, but such is the signs of the times, my friends. One night last week, I was reading some scripture with some of my loved ones ­ we happened to be at 2Timothy 2, and verses 14 through 19 jumped out at me: 2Timothy 2:14-19 "14 Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. [striving about words, to their own destruction ­ we're talking about wresting, twisting the scriptures, to their own destruction! But, what are we to do?] 15 Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. 16 But shun profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto more ungodliness. [Start with one corruption (say, like, free will), add continual profane, empty, godless babbling, stir well, and voila ­ same sex marriage and "Gay Christian" conferences!] 17 And their word [their corrupt, satanic words] will eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus; 18 Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already [that was the particular heresy of those two gentlemen]; and overthrow the faith of some. 19 ¶Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity." [Depart from iniquity! They are so far from departing from iniquity, that they have now created an entire brand of Christianity that is defined by what the Bible calls an abomination ­ "Gay Christian" ­ unbelievable!] So, here's what struck me about that passage: the Greek word for subverting is "Katastrophe" ­ spelled just like our English word, except it starts with K, not C. Meaning "overthrow", and "destruction". These are serious matters! Messing with God's plain standards brings catastrophe! Utter destruction of men's lives, and more importantly, their souls! The Greek word for Canker is "gangraina", which is where we get our English word "Gangrene". That's when some part of the body ­ typically an extremity, like hands, feet, fingers, toes, are injured, and / or infected, and the tissue begins to die. Once it's dead, that necrotic tissue starts destroying the living tissue next to it. Once Gangrene has progressed to a certain point, the only way to keep it from killing you, is to amputate the effected area. The time for talking is DONE! CUT IT OFF! Understanding those two words ought to clearly paint the picture that when you start to screw around with the plain, simple, commands of our Creator, there will be ONLY death and destruction to follow! With that in mind, consider that our dear friends, and fellow soldiers, in this spiritual warfare, have traveled to Oregon, in order to cry  Page 2 of 10 against the altars of this God-forsaken nation, and particularly that "Gay Christian" conference. I can think of no better way to describe what those satanic fools will do at that conference, than strive about words, to the UTTER DESTRUCTION of the hearers, and fill the air with profane and vain babblings, which will increase to more ungodliness, spreading like deadly gangrene. We know what manner of viper's nest our loved ones are standing in up in Oregon, and we know how they were violently, criminally abused last night. We know also that the Lord of Hosts faithfully, fully delivered them from the jaws of those gnashing wolves, and we are thankful ­ both for the deliverance, AND the affliction! We pray that the Lord will make their way to prosper today, and will give them supernatural courage, boldness, and wisdom for the hour; and we pray for any of God's little ones, who will hear those words, and be convicted in their hearts, and thereby ­ through the working of the Holy Spirit - be brought to repentance. Psalm 126: 6 "He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him." Switching gears to another topic: we will be displaced for our public worship services for a few weeks, because of the renovations that we're doing on the church building. As we worked out the logistics for that, it gave rise to some thoughts that I'd like to share with you. First, is that the building itself is not the church. We commonly refer to that building as the church for shorthand - "I'm going over to the church" - but we know that it's simply the building that the Lord has kindly given us as a resource, and a place where we can be assembled together. It's good to think upon the fact that the church is not, and never will be a building made of wood and stone (Acts 17:24,25) ­ it is not a place that is crafted by human hands. Thank God! If it were, then it would most assuredly fail! We are surrounded by "Christians" who have put their faith into buildings, systems, traditions, and doctrines that have all been crafted by men! They believe that they can maintain these things by the strength of men! What folly! Remember now, that the Greek word that has been translated as "church" is "Ekklesia", which means "assembly", or more specifically, "a called out assembly". You might recall from my "History of the Bible" sermon that "Ecclesiastical" words such as Ekklesia were NOT to be translated, by the order of his royal nibs, the "most high and mighty" King James, when they made the King James Version in 1611. Remember also, that the Anglican Church (otherwise known as the Episcopal Church, or "Diet Catholic") had a man-made hierarchy to protect; and so, those "Ecclesiastical" words were supposed to be replaced by the approved words of the Anglican Church. Therefore the word "church" had to be used for Ekklesia, rather than simply translating the word, which would be "assembly". Another example would be the word "episkope", which means "overseer", but was replaced with the accepted Anglican Church word "Bishop".  Page 3 of 10 I make that point, not because I want to quibble over those words, but I would have us all to be VERY CLEAR on what they mean. So ­ when you think "church", your mind ought to immediately think "assembly". When you think "bishop", you should think "overseer", which describes the sober function of an elder in a local church, not a manmade hierarchical office that comes with a chess piece and a funny hat. So ­ back to the point ­ the church (assembly) is people ­ an assembly of people ­ people that have been called out / separated / sanctified by the Holy Spirit, according to the working of the covenant. A people who have one thing in common: faith. It is not man-made, it cannot be manufactured, and it cannot be counterfeit! A people who are assembled together BY GOD, because of that faith, and who have forsaken all else that they may sojourn together, ministering to one another, and laboring together for the ministry of Jesus Christ, and ordered in all ways, and walking obedient, according to the scriptures. Consider the scripture: Ephesians 2:19-22 "19 Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God; 20 And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; 21 In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: 22 In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit." Where you find THAT kind of an assembly, you find a candlestick. Where you find THAT kind of an assembly, you find, and hear the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ (Revelation 1:12,13). There is much to be said on this topic, and many scriptures to bring to bear, but I will leave you with that, for today. The second thing that comes to mind at this hour, is how thankful we should be for the abundant resources and gifts that the Lord has bestowed upon this little flock of slaughter ­ including that building. Those resources are lent to us, that we might use them ­ as good stewards - in the service of our King. That building has been a great blessing ­ it has been a place for us to assemble, it has housed our beloved friends, and it has been a place from which we have waged spiritual warfare in these dark days ­ praise God! So let us be thankful. Let us also be thankful that our brother and sister have this place where we can assemble on this day. Wherever the assembly is, there the church is. I have great comfort to be assembled with each of you. Let us now move on to my primary text for today: 1Corinthians 11:10 "For this cause ought the woman to have power [authority] on her head because of the angels."  Page 4 of 10 Some years ago, Gramps preached on this verse, and it was very impactful to me. Given that there are many of folks now present in this assembly that were not present at that time, or were too young to remember, I thought it would be good to revisit. My friends, we live in a society that has WHOLESALE rejected the notion that ANYONE should be in subjection to the authority of man OR God, and they particularly hate the notion that women should be in subjection to the authority of their husbands, or that children should be in subjection to the authority of their parents. Isaiah 3:12(a) "As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them." We live amongst a sea of effeminate, foolish men; rebellious, usurping, Jezebellian women; and godless, beastly children who obey NO authority. It is an amazing sight to behold. But ­ it is not so amongst the people of God! We know that he has established a proper order of things in this earth, and we are to humbly acknowledge that order with thanksgiving, and walk in all ways according to it. In 1Corinthians 11, Paul speaks to the simple outward showing of that authority, whereby the woman is to have uncut hair, and to cover her head when assembled in public worship, and the man is to have short hair, and is to un-cover his head when assembled in public worship. Simple concepts! Let's look at the passage in detail, 1Corinthians 11:1-16: "1 ¶ Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. 2 Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you." Paul is commending them for all the ways that they are following after the "ordinances" that he taught them (Paul consistently commends what is right, before addressing what is wrong). The Greek word for "ordinances" here ("paradosis") is always translated as "tradition", except for this one spot, and it means "traditions", or "instructions". Given that, and the context of the next several chapters, it helps us to see that he's primarily speaking to his instructions regarding behavior in the public worship services ­ it's broader than just the two ordinances that we typically think of. This concept is very similar to what we find in Chapter 14 verse 40 of this same epistle: "Let all things be done decently and in order". Having commended them, Paul now begins to lay out those things that he has against them. He spends several chapters fussing about what they are doing wrong, starting with this matter of authority, subjection, and the covering. "3 But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God."  Page 5 of 10 Here is the heart of the matter! Here is the proper order of things that the Almighty Creator set in place amongst his human creation. Beautiful simplicity. Woman, Man, Christ, God. Universally despised and rejected by the depraved, prideful human heart. There are many wonderful words about this matter throughout the scriptures, but time fails to look at them today. Here are some key passages on that I recommend you read carefully: 1Peter 3:1-7; 1Timothy 2:11-15; Ephesians 5:22-33. We live in a society that violently rails against this notion, but it doesn't change God. They want to accuse any who would be obedient to this simple truth of being a knuckle dragging Neanderthal that abuses, and looks down upon women. Nothing could be further from the truth! I can humbly, thankfully recognize the wonderful gifts that the Lord has given these blessed, sober, wise, godly women that stand shoulder to shoulder with the men in this church, while at the same time recognizing, retaining, and properly exercising the authority wherein I have been commanded! Don't talk to me about whose smarter ­ it's irrelevant! Each human has God given gifts that are to be exercised LAWFULLY (2Timothy 2:5) ­ otherwise they are exercised in the service of Satan! "4 Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonoureth his head. 5 But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven." As with many topics, the question of what is meant by "praying or prophesying", and "covered" is widely debated and corrupted. Everyone and their brother has an explanation for what this means, mostly those explanations tend to make it utterly meaningless, so that there is NO standard whatsoever. I believe that by the context (within this passage, and within this epistle,) the meaning is very straightforward. Praying and prophesying (declaring the whole counsel of God) are the primary aspects of what we do when the church is assembled for public worship. Within that public worship, the man's head is NOT to be covered, and the woman's head IS to be covered. For the man to do otherwise is to dishonor his head: Christ. For the woman to do otherwise is to dishonor her head: her husband or her father. I will answer a few of the common objections that are propped up: 1) Some make a case that the long hair itself is sufficient for the covering, given that verse 15 says it is given for a covering. However, seeing that there is a specific time and place where the covering is required (praying or prophesying), the only logical way for your hair to be that covering, is if you could put on and take off your hair at will ­ like a life-sized lego character. That argument doesn't pass the sniff test. Indeed, a woman's long hair is a glory to her, and is given as a perpetual covering, but these verses clearly indicate an additional, conspicuous covering is required when the church is assembled. 2) Many make the case that the "praying" referenced is more general than the public prayer when the church is assembled together. They argue that we are to be prayerful all the time, so  Page 6 of 10 women should be covered all the time, lest they break into prayer at any given moment. Again, if they are to be covered at all times, then why would a specific time and place be designated? Additionally, that argument proves too much, as it would mean that a man would NEVER be able to cover his head, given that he should likewise always be prayerful. You can't have that both ways. 3) Another argument is that women are never supposed to speak in the public worship service (1Corinthians 14), so how could this refer to the public worship service. The answer is simple: Regardless of who is praying, or preaching, our hearts are all engaged, and we are all participating. When James refers to being a "hearer" of the word (James 1:23), he is clearly referring to hearing AND preaching. "6 For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered." In other words: If she's not going to be covered, then she might as well cut her hair off; she is blatantly usurping the role of the man, so you might as well look like one! Paul is posing a rhetorical question here ­ OF COURSE it's a shame for a woman to be shorn. He isn't giving an option, he is showing the deadly folly of playing games with these issues. "7 For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man. 8 For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man. 9 Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man. 10 For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of the angels." This verse is the trump card to the whole discussion. She ought to have power on her head ­ that word means "authority". She shows forth the authority that has been set over her in this earth, and shows that she is in subjection to that authority ­ perpetually, with her uncut hair, and conspicuously with a covering, and her silence (chapter 14) when the church is assembled for public worship. Why? Because of the angels! Paul gives a resounding, clear, simple answer. It settles the matter. It ought to end any argument. Because of the angels! What do the angels have to do with this discussion? Well, let's consider the nature of these creatures, and see if that sheds light on the matter.  Angels are a creation of God, just as humans are, and they were created long before humans. o Job 38:4-7 "4 ¶ Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding. 5 Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line  Page 7 of 10 upon it? 6 Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; 7 When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" o These morning stars / sons of God are the angels ­ present and rejoicing at the creation of the earth.  They are powerful creatures. o Isaiah 37:36 "Then the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses." o 1 angel, 1 night, wiped out the 185,000 strong Assyrian host. o 1 angel, 1 night, slaughtered the firstborn of man and beast in all of Egypt.  They are messengers who stand in the presence of God, and fly to do his bidding, perfectly aligned with his will. o Genesis 28:12 "And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it." o 24x7x365 super hi-way of activity ­ continually coming and going from the presence of God, to perfectly accomplish his will in the earth.  There is an innumerable company of them, and they are particularly interested in, and intimately involved with the people of God in this earth. They are directed by God in the protection of his people, and the destruction of their enemies. o Hebrews 12:22 "But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels" o 2Kings 6:16,17 "16 And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them. 17 And Elisha prayed, and said, LORD, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the LORD opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha."  They will be intimately involved in the destruction of the wicked when the affairs of this earth are wrapped up. o See all of Revelation.  They particularly, personally watch after each of the sheep, and report to the father in heaven. o Matthew 18:10 "10 Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven." o Exodus 23:20-22 "20 ¶ Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have  Page 8 of 10 prepared. 21 Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him. 22 But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.  The angels, along with the spirits of just men made perfect, make up a great cloud of witnesses that assemble around, and encourage the saints of God in this earth, and that subsequently receive their spirit when their race is complete. o Hebrews 12:1 "Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us." o Luke 16:22 "And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried;"  Angels have been given no savior. o Hebrews 2:16 "For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham."  Many angels are elect of God, and seeing that they have no savior, they have therefore necessarily remained pure and obedient. o 1Timothy 5:21 "I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality."  One third of the angels, being damned of God, fell by the sins of pride and rebellion. Satan led that charge, as he desired the station of Jesus Christ, and rebelled. o Jude 1:6 "And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day." o Revelation 12:3,4 "3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. 4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born." Consider these powerful messengers of God, whose work and will is PERFECTLY aligned with him, and whom we are warned not to anger, lest they testify against us, and are dispatched to destroy us. Consider that their first glimpse of sin (before humans ever existed) was the pride and rebellion against authority of their brother,  Page 9 of 10 Satan. Consider that they DESPISE that pride and rebellion. Consider that when they look down and behold a woman who has rejected the authority of her husband, a husband or father who has cavalierly relinquished that authority, and a church who assembles together in brazen defiance of God in the matter, they see one thing: SATAN! What report will they give to the King of the place? How quickly will the depart from such a thankless, disobedient assembly? "11 Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. 12 For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God." Here Paul preempts any brute that would use this beautiful doctrine as an excuse to be a tyrant over his wife or daughter. The order of things that God established is for the mutual help, care, and comfort of the man AND the woman. Lest any man be puffed up, Paul reminds them that there will be no more men, except they are born of a woman, up to and including Jesus Christ, our savior. Wherever you find a requirement to be in subjection to authority, you find a heavier burden on the person who wields that authority, seeing that they will give an account to THEIR master, Jesus Christ, who sees ALL that is done in this earth. Now Paul goes on to wrap up his admonition: "13 Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? [have you heard a word that I've said here?] 14 Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? 15 But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering." Now we get the proof text for a woman to have uncut hair. Paul needs no other argument than to say that nature itself teaches us. It is a glory for her! It is a gift ­ given as a covering. It is a thing that is uniquely in each woman's control, whereby she can continually ­ every moment of the day ­ show forth her thankful subjection to her husband or father. He uses this well known truth to further provoke them to see their duty in wearing a covering in public worship. You will hear some compromising heretic say that "long" doesn't mean "uncut", and therefore you can cut it a little bit. Really? You're going to play NEEDLESS games with this matter? That hair is a glory to her ­ you only want some of that glory? It is a covering to show forth authority, so you would take away from that authority? Why? For fashion!?! Because it gets in the way when you go to the bathroom!?! Because your kids swing on it like a Rhesus monkey!?! To hell with you, Mr. and Mrs. Heretic! Paul directly addresses such quibbling folly, in the next verse:  Page 10 of 10 "16 But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God." This is not a close question! There will be no contention over this matter in a true Church of the Lord Jesus Christ! These heretics have corrupted this outward symbol in the 2000 years since Paul wrote these words, just as they have utterly cast-off the authority that it symbolizes. Not in this church! Not in any church that would consider the angels who are looking on! Not in any church that desires to keep their candlestick! I love you all. Amen.  
