Sermon to the Saints which are at Topeka, Kansas -- Sunday, July 5, 2015. Good afternoon, beloved. Having in my last sermon considered some framework in the examination of the ascendancy and administration of this terminal antagonist, we now will turn some attention to what things will befall those in the earth while he works his particular mischief, and what legacy he will bring the rotten earth he is to temporarily hold sway over. In hopes of improving the value to you all here of my analysis of this cryptic introduction of his Satanic kingship, I think it is important to understand that the Apostle is here expressly identifying a vision of a new threat that arises in this cataclysmic game of thrones. The vision articulates the attributes of two beasts; of which the first is the focus of my attention in last week's and this week's sermons. These attributes, by enumeration, are: 1. From whence he comes; 2. His pedigree; 3. His mission; 4. His authority; 5. The duration of his kingdom; and 6. The unique threat he presents to the 144,000 who dwell in the earth Understanding that John is having revealed to him Antichrist's attributes -- rather than real-time viewing of the full detail of how the beast obtained to those attributes -- is key to attaining to a clearer view of what is here being granted to those identified in the first chapter of the Revelation: "Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand." (Revelation 1:3) I want to use the opening words of this beast's description to give you here an example of the distinction that I'm making, so that we can both examine one of these attributes and help us to see the import of this distinction. "And I ... saw a beast rise up out of the sea". (Revelation 13:1) What means this rising up out of the sea? Are we to believe that John literally observed the beast coming up out of the Mediterranean Sea? Was that, as some expositors insist, because it was there he met his fate in one of his heads when, as we read in a later verse he was, "wounded to death" -- meaning, is he rising from the dead, out of the sea? Or do we observe the words of John when it was revealed to him in a later place discussing this same "sea", but calling it "many waters": "And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues." (Revelation 17:15) If we view the vision as John seeing the actual events in real time, rather than viewing characteristics of the Antichrist monster, then we will find many things written of him that leave us in head-scratching confusion. I believe it is proper, and even necessary, for us to see that Antichrist is drawn from one who in providence was Page 1 of 10  renowned among all "peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues"; one who will be fitting for the duty to which he is called. One of his attributes is that he comes to this stage -- when the abomination of desolation has fully and finally ensconced itself in the holy place it ought not (Matthew 24:15; Mark 13:14) -- from a status of singular fame and respect in the eyes of the whole of the earth's inhabitants. This is no new flight of fancy for the condemned, and yet fruitlessly hopeful sons of men. They already know this king. They already love him. It is but a little nudge for them to receive him as both king and saviour. We examined the pedigree of this Antichrist last week. He is, you recall, "of the seven" (Revelation 17:11), and last week we made some examination of those seven predecessors to this final form he takes. There is, however, yet some additional joy to be mined from these passages, when this superman is considered further in this attribute. "And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast." (Revelation 13:3) We need to make some consideration of this very prominent identifier of this final iteration of Antichrist, as it provides us a remarkable insight not only to who he is, but who the seventh and final pre-apocalyptic "head" is as well. To look at these words and come away with a vague view of Antichrist as just a generic smoke-andmirrors, well-marketed zombie robs the reader -- in my sincerest and most humble opinion -- of a flood of both knowledge and peace. So is it particularly unsatisfying to read these words as symbolism ... meaning that there is not an actual wound unto death. The other two places this phenomenon is expressed in the Apocalypse negates such a reading: "And he [that is, the False Prophet] ... causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed." (Revelation 13:12) and "And [the False Prophet] deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live." (Revelation 13:14) Furthermore, when this same beast is under examination in the 17th chapter, the description is clearly of a man who has gone into hell (after death) and has returned from thence by the power granted his Satanic benefactor: "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition:" (Revelation 17:8) What we can fairly conclude from these passages is that one of the attributes of this beast is that his pedigree includes having been slain by "a sword" and in the vision given to John he is transitioned from death to life again. We can also fairly conclude that the man, who is translated through such a wonder from death to life again, was renowned when he died and grows in loving wonder before the inhabitants upon his reincarnation. Page 2 of 10  But how can we identify more specifically this king-turned-superman beast, and better understand from Scripture why he is so perfectly fitted to quickly assume world-kingship and draw all the nations together to the consummation of his evil work? Amazingly, this same introduction of our Christ's mocker and enemy gives us a clear answer -- when considered in the light of relevant, contextual passages of Scripture. Another part of articulating this poser's pedigree is found in these intimidating words: "And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations." (Revelation 13:7) Sometimes a punctuation mark tells us amazing things. Here, the use of the colon in the middle of this verse ties the two phenomenon eternally together. Why was this beast able to assume power over "all kindreds, and tongues, and nations" -- from which he is introduced as rising (verse 1)? Why, it is because of how he dealt with the Saints! That is, my friends who may have once trembled at what these words portend, this passage is describing for us how it is that this man -- turned by death and resurrection into Satan's superman -gained his world prominence ... as the seventh iteration of Antichrist! Take a breath. Set your thoughts here for a moment. Now, consider these words from earlier in this amazing book of prophecy: "And when they [i.e., the two witnesses] shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth." (Revelation 11:7-10) Look at this vile, disgusting scene unfolding in the fag-dominated generation that vomits incessantly about their vaunted peacefulness and tolerance and respect and blah, blah, barf! Look at them! This celebration -- as we absolutely, positively, without the least hint of confusion or doubt, from extensive experience, KNOW -- has at its primary focus this beast that has accomplished this feat for this world of monstrous sinners! They absolutely adore this man -- who is the seventh "head" that is slain and then at the appointed hour "ascendeth out of the bottomless pit" to the wonder and amazement of his world sycophants who now cry in proud consent: "Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? " (Revelation 13:4) We can now also understand the nature of this deadly wound that is identified in one of Antichrist's heads. The events of Revelation 11:7-13 are declared in the 14th verse to be the conclusion of the "second woe", and immediately thereupon we have the sounding of the Seventh trumpet. This trumpet, as we are instructed in the writings of the Apostle Paul, brings what is known in Christendom as "The Rapture": "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up Page 3 of 10  together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord." (1 Thessalonians 4:16-17) These words, we are instructed, are designed for us to use to "comfort one another" (1 Thessalonians 4:18), and they are a thrilling and comforting vision painted for our hungry souls. Consider, though, that there is a function in this explosive event that is not itemized in this passage just quoted. A function that, in the face of what the seventh iteration of the beast has just done -- terrorizing the Saints that have dwelt in the earth through the first "forty and two months" or "thousand two hundred and threescore days" during which these two witnesses brought plagues and torment to the pre-advent world -- might give a whole wash of relief and joy to this humble house. Another passage -- also written to the church at Thessalonica -- shows us, I believe, the joyful wound unto death that the seventh king who sits on the seventh mountain is dealt: "And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming:" (2 Thessalonians 2:8) These are two events identified in this verse -- articulated in reverse order, I submit -- that describes how Christ deals with the seventh "head", wounding it to death "with the brightness of his coming" and with the eighth and final iteration at Armageddon, as extensively described in Revelation 19. Christ, in any form whatever, must carry with His presence the reality that He is the Word. The Word, in Scripture, is a sword. The beast is said to have a "wound by a sword". I believe this is a proper, scriptural view of these passages. Christ's return has the immediate, deadly effect on this vicious king who had slain the two witnesses and brought an end to the tormenting preachments regarding what God was doing in the de-creation of the race. The two witnesses, having been called up into the sky where "their enemies beheld them" (Revelation 11:12), are suddenly joined by a returning Christ and the aggregated crowd of dead Saints and living, translated Christian Saints where we are "caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air:" (1 Thessalonians 4:17). A sickly, dark world that Satan has temporarily taken possession of, is in need of a champion ... a warrior ... an advocate ... a saviour. There is a beef the earth-dwellers have: "And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth." (Revelation 11:18) As was evidenced by the thronging, international celebration at the death of the two witnesses, the issue has been joined. There is no ignorance among the earth's inhabitants. There is no general malaise or indifference. Every soul that gropes about in gross darkness, like maggots falling all over one the other in their feverish rage, knows that an agenda has been set upon the return of Christ. Who will speak for them? Who will speak against this new display of authority resting inexplicably in the heavens -- hovering over the earth? Page 4 of 10  "And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; ... And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven." (Revelation 13:5-6) To begin with ... since it is important that these things can be intimately understood by every person in this house ... let us be clear what is meant by "blaspheme". The Greek word is defined as: "to speak reproachfully, rail at, revile, calumniate". Or in today's vernacular, to talk every form of trash that can be conceived to talk. But, with the intellect of this superman, he becomes the ultimate trash-talking artist. As many cultural distinctions exist in the expressions of hatred and reproach, that many smooth articulations of great things of blasphemy are awarded to this devilish prosecutor for His Majesty the Devil. This is not a thing hard to be understood as key to Antichrist's mission. A more elusive conception is to understand what is meant by "to blaspheme his [i.e., God's] name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven." To properly apprehend the scope of this work of Antichrist, it is good to obtain this context: "And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail." (Revelation 11:19) This here is not to be understood as being in the Heaven of heavens, or the third heaven. This is in the sky -that expanse of air above the earth, but below the stars' habitation. This is that same place where the detombed and living-translated at Christ's return go to meet with him "in the air". As with the two witnesses that ascended, this place and those that dwell therein are visible to the earth dwellers; a perpetual source of agitation and fear. Without the expertise of a smooth-talking, loud-lie peddling, master blasphemer, there would be no hope of gathering a town -- much less the armies of the kingdoms of the earth -- to fire spitballs at so great a display of power. And there is more instruction in these words. What is the significance -- at the translation of the Gentile church and resurrected Saints to a temple in the skies -- of this display of "the ark of his testament"? Is this, perhaps, the hint of another amazing phenomenon that was set up when the seventh trumpet was sounded? Please follow me on this journey of discovering the concomitant mission of Antichrist, with his campaign of blasphemy. "In that day shall the branch of the LORD be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem: When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. And the LORD will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain." (Isaiah 4:2-6) Page 5 of 10  As examined in a previous sermon on Revelation 12, the 144,000 elect remnant of the Children of Israel are to be put into a state of preservation for the same period of time -- three and one-half years -- as provided to this artificial Christ is given to work his wicked will. As is unmistakably confirmed for our edification in the first verse of the 14th chapter: "And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name written in their foreheads." (Revelation 14:1) It would be intentional obfuscation to pretend that this place of refuge of Isaiah's prophecy is anyplace other than on Mount Zion! Furthermore, with what we know was done for the Children of Israel when they left out of Egypt, so we should find no surprise would be the case with these, their blessed descendants who are supernaturally preserved by this same mechanism: "At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail stones and coals of fire. The LORD also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire. Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them." (Psalms 18:12-14) As the God of Heaven disrupted that first iteration of Antichrist who pursued the escaping Jews from Egypt -through the presence of an impenetrable cloud from which the horrors of hail stones, lightnings and thunderings issued ... so again he uses this force -- descending from the open temple in the heavens over Mt. Zion -- a protective cloud for his 144,000. Likewise, as we know the pillar of fire streamed up from the Holy of holies in that ancient camp, we read what has been written for the protection of these last remnant: "For I, saith the LORD, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her." (Zechariah 2:5) It is the existence of these two great symbols of Christ's claim upon this created heaven and earth that animates this hellish population of damned souls to rally to Antichrist's call -- and sustains him in the mission of piercing the wall of protection, destroying the 144,000, and kicking Christ off his globe. Further indications that this heavenly operational staging ground is set up in that span of air Scripture refers to as "a firmament in the midst of the waters" (Genesis 1:6) can be found in the vision John is given of the 144,000 Jews who sing a "new song before the throne" and those attendants thereto (Revelation 14:3), even while they are seen with Christ who "stood on the mount Sion" (Revelation 14:1). In the scene following, three angels are viewed flying in the midst of heaven while they declare things to "them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Revelation 14:6-11). Finally, Christ and the angels of God who are preparing the earth's inhabitants to go into the winepress of God's wrath at Armageddon are again seen in this same air, and conversing with our Christ as he is seen sitting upon a cloud -a thing that only exists in the firmament in the midst of the waters. (Revelation 14:14-19) Therefore, I conclude with full heart that without doing some considerable violence in wresting these blessed scriptures, it cannot be refuted that Christ and His entourage are staged in the heavens above Mt. Zion, where "God, ... his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven" are continually visible, but utterly unreachable by the raging, tormented damned in the earth. They being thus perplexed, are gifted by God with a "strong delusion, Page 6 of 10  that they should believe a lie:" (2 Thessalonians 2:11) That lie is this mendacious monstrosity that has come up, by Satan's earthly powers, from death to life to fulfill the cause of God in this apocalyptic opera: "That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 Thessalonians 2:12) ********* To begin this next piece of analysis, I think it is necessary to reset the focus of the lens through which these earth dwellers look at the utterly stupefying events being brought to their doorstep. For at least three and a half years -- while the Creator sifted the chaff from the wheat through war, domestic bloodshed, disease, famine, pestilence, natural world upheavals, and monsters from sea and hell itself -- world leaders have fretted themselves to search out "these that have turned the world upside down" (Acts 17:6) and to end their lives. The concept puts me in mind of a line out of a favorite movie of mine. Two high-ranking security officials for the U.S. government are attempting to get their hands around the damage caused by what they perceive to be a rogue agent. When one asks the other about whether something that was done could have been possible under the circumstances, the other says "I've kinda lost my perspective on what's possible". My friends, we are viewing a world here, in this passage introducing the Antichrist, that has lost the capacity to even pretend to civility. While they are able, through technology, to know what is going on throughout the whole of the earth -- as evidenced by their capacity to celebrate the world over at the death of the two witnesses, and even view their dead bodies in the streets -- the carnage that has become the new "normal" has every man on edge. "And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast." (Revelation 17:12-13) You are not to conceive here that ten raggedy despots glom onto Antichrist to develop into a fiefdom that concentrates focus in a portion of the earth. This is identifying a realignment of the whole of the world's governmental power. The dividing line is where the battle is staging ... where the enemy of this beast has staged his glorious temple in the air ... and there are the kings of the east and the kings of the west; five in each direction. The vision of Nebuchadnezzar reveals this same array: "And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided". (Daniel 2:41) Further reference to this array is found in part of the description of horrors that will befall this kingdom of the beast, when the bowls of the wrath of God are being poured out: "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared." (Revelation 16:12) Page 7 of 10  The duration of the reign of Antichrist is distinctly identified as "forty and two months" (Revelation 13:5). There is no credible exposition that I have found ... nor anticipate can be found ... that would make this anything other than forty two months. Further, there is no exegetical discord in the ten kings being said to "receive power as kings one hour with the beast" as this Greek word "hora" includes in the definition "for a certain definite time". Further, since these kings are said to "make war with the Lamb" (Revelation 17:14), they clearly could not only be in power for literally one clock hour. The events at Armageddon represent an end to the kingdom of Antichrist, and are far too extensive in scope to be considered within a portion of a single sermon. I will give that robust subject independent attention, and hope that our God will suffer me to feed you with that bread of life on another day. What is left today is to gain some understanding of the antecedent events -- and specifically how they relate to our beloved friends who are still dwelling in these human frames. We know that there is a keen correlation because of these words: "If any man have an ear, let him hear. He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity: he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints." (Revelation 13:9-10) To properly understand the significance of the Revelator's warning contained in the close to this introduction of the beast, we must look at the prophesied events we know of a certainty are to take place during the literal final death throes of this world and her population. Two other calls to the elect in the earth at this time are found in associated passages, and might be helpful to understand this one more fully: "Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus." (Revelation 14:12) and "Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame." (Revelation 16:15) All three of these writings come during the time of this hellish, prosecutorial antagonist. They are all in the same context, address the same terror, and demand the same thing -- patient waiting on the Lord for deliverance, and full faith that these matters are in His hand to dispose of. Now -- sitting a few years (at least) from the vortex of this issue -- we can only conceive imperfectly the intensity of the horror. Our Jewish friends will experience the fullest hatred of Satan, Antichrist, and the False Prophet; and will be possessed of these vile, naturally-sinful and faithless frames. Patience ... watchfulness ... faith ... indeed. There have been things written of this time by Old Testament prophets and Christ Himself. A consideration of these writings -- understanding that the world's powers are coalesced, like never before in the history of the race, in unified militancy. Not just a heathen horde from Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, Rome -- or even the Billy-bad-ass America -- but the seven continents filled with bloodlust. Not just a hunt for Bin Laden -with full knowledge that a considerable part of the population is willing (at least tacitly) to render aid and Page 8 of 10  comfort to him -- but the concentrated and universal giving of all intelligence assets to effectuate the successful completion of this new champion's military campaign. "And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time:" (Daniel 12:1) and "For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened." (Matthew 24:21-22) and "For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city." (Zechariah 14:2) This prophetic passage from the abstruse writings of Zechariah describes the very focal point of this onslaught of Antichrist and his armies -- pre-Armageddon. This reference to the "residue of the people" clearly references those who are the remnant of the Jews -- protected upon Mt. Zion. These who are able to see the horrors unfolding just outside the camp, where their unregenerate brethren are being faced with a slaughter of such proportions that our dear beloved Daniel fainted with grief at the sight: "And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves. Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength." (Daniel 10:7-8) That the God of heaven has redeemed His elect from the earth and the horrible end it is to meet does not prevent the upheavals in our own breasts to take steps to vindicate what we perceive to be an immediate threat to our very lives. Remember that these 144,000 are keenly aware of that celebration upon the slaying of the two witnesses, having occurred so close in time past. And do we not feel these waves of nausea at times when we consider what horrors our current generation brings upon itself with their rebellion and flaunting sins? Can you not feel the trembling of heart and spirit that must needs possess a number of these newlysealed Jews standing in such close proximity to the unfolding slaughter of their unregenerate neighbors? We know how close they are, as is prophesied: "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked." (Psalms 91:7-8) If that prophesy is suitable for our generation ... shall we deny it's suitability for that most violent time to come? So, it is not to be a wonder that there would be some who would be inclined to take matters into their own hands. Some who would feel the rush of hatred and anger and retaliation flow through their quivering Page 9 of 10  hearts and spirits as these horrors ebb and flow before their eyes. Here ... right here ... in such a crucible of trial and trauma ... you see the essence of "the patience and faith of the saints" (Revelation 13:10). You see, there is nothing in this (or the companion passages giving like warnings) that intimates any one of these blessed 144,000 relent. When we read of our present duty to: "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour" (1 Peter 5:8) we do not conclude that there is a single one of God's elect precious who will fail to fulfill that duty, and remain safe from this enemy. Likewise, we know from scripture that these blessed 144,000 will not take matters into their own hands, and be taken into captivity or killed with the sword; for they are standing triumphant on Mt. Sion with the blessed Lamb. I have not given -- nor could I give, in this limited space -- full consideration of the nature of the horrible slaughter of the inhabitants of Israel and Jerusalem under the reign of Antichrist. Isaiah, for example, paints the grimmest of pictures in this regard: "Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, And the LORD have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land." (Isaiah 6:11-12) Whole chapters written in the major and minor prophets provide minute detail of the scope and breadth -- as well as the issue; and I encourage all here to feast on those great writings. For now it should be understood that Antichrist is the principle ... the mainspring ... the inducement to this horrific act; and is intent upon breaching that secure camp of the protected saints until the battle is set in array at Armageddon. There is much still to cover, in unpacking the prophecies of John in this beautiful book of Revelation. I pray that we here are given ever more and better understanding as we see the earth and her inhabitants slouching toward those days of de-creation and final demise. A key component, at least for the final forty two months pre-millennial, is a view of Antichrist's world power. I hope these past two weeks have improved your comprehension of this subject matter, and I encourage any and all to examine these matters to your satisfaction and comfort. Thank you for another opportunity to feed you, and I love you all most dearly. Amen. Page 10 of 10  
