To the Saints of God at Topeka, Kansas July 19, 2015 The church at Thyatira (4th church, Revelation 2:18-29) 18 And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write; These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass; 19 I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first. 20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. 21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not. 22 Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. 23 And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you according to your works. 24 But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden. 25 But that which ye have already hold fast till I come. 26 And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations: 27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father. 28 And I will give him the morning star. 29 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. 20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. Queen Jezebel was the wife of King Ahab, who was more evil than all the kings that went before him and greatly provoked God (1 Kings 16:30). You have to be evil personified to reject your own people and go and find your wife among a heathen, Baal-worshipping nation and then not just take a commoner, but take of the royal family so your kingdom is forever linked by marriage to that filthy Baal worshipping and God rejecting culture. Ahab was covetous of power and wealth. Page 1 of 10  We are told in 1 Kings 16:31-32 that Jezebel was the daughter of Eth-Baal (means "with-Baal"), the heathen king of Tyre and Sidon. Princess Jezebel was used to getting her way. According to Josephus, Eth-Baal, her father, came to power by murdering his own brothers to take the throne and become king. Before her father became King he was the high priest of Baal in Tyre. Eth-Baal is reported to have reigned 68 years and had great influence in Tyre and Sidon, and in Israel. Beloved, this is where Jezebel learned how to reign over a kingdom, but not according to the things of God and she will leave a great wake of destruction behind her. Likewise, this Jezebel-like woman in Thyatira did a lot of damage at that church to the extent that Christ was ready to disavow himself of that church and yank their candlestick. At Jezebel's bidding King Ahab went and worshipped and served Baal in Sidon, erected an altar to Baal in a house for Baal he built in Samaria and he made a grove (1 Kings 16:31-33). Beloved, that is off the charts bad. The first two commandments are: 1. Thou shalt have no other gods before me. 2. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me (Ex 20:3-5). By all accounts Jezebel was a fanatical follower of Baal. This included having 450 prophets of Baal scattered around Israel and 400 prophets of the grove that ate at her table (1 Kings 18:19). This was an outright abomination of the worst kind. This is notorious sinning. We also know from 1 Kings 21 that Queen Jezebel used great guile, ingenuity, and deceit in the extreme to concoct and plan the conspiracy to take innocent blood and murder Naboth and his sons (2 Kings 9:26), so King Ahab could have Naboth's vineyard. Beloved, in that little escapade she broke four commandments in one act: thou shalt not covet, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not kill. Jezebel misused governmental power for religious purposes, to persecute and kill the prophets of God (1 Kings 18:3-4) [Obadiah, Ahab's governor, who feared the LORD greatly, took an hundred prophets, and hid them Page 2 of 10  by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water, when Jezebel "cut off" the prophets of the LORD. According to Strong's the words "cut off" mean: cut off a body part, eliminate, kill, behead. Gill says Jezebel put them to death. Jezebel attempted to kill Elijah. Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time (1 Kings 19:2). If God does not save Elijah, he is a dead man. Jezebel continually stirred up (enticed, provoked, instigate) Ahab to do wickedness (1 Kings 21:25). Jezebel was famous for her whoredoms and her witchcraft. And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? (2 Kings 9:22). When Jehu came to execute judgment on Jezebel she "painted her face and tied her head..." (2 Kings 9:30). That's how you try to seduce someone with fashion and make-up and such. Beauty is vain and favour is deceitful. Godly women do not do that. The expositors say that the worship of Baal included filthy sex practices and sexual indulgences. Gill says "it was insufferable for a woman to teach, and especially such a strumpet." Jezebel is one of the most wicked women (if not wicked persons) in the whole Bible. Beloved, she makes my Top 10 Evilest People in the Bible, easy. Jezebel was not your normal sinful woman, gone astray. There is something extraordinarily evil going on here, she was of the "depths of Satan." How in the world did the Church at Thyatria come to have an evil person that was similar to Jezebel in their midst and not see it? Beloved, some of the expositors say the only sin here was spiritual idolatry. I do not believe it. There are simply too many references by Christ to actual physical fleshly sins here to just mean idolatry. Christ uses "seduce" (which is usually used when there is a sexual connotation), a "bed" where illicit sexual activity usually takes place, "adultery" (not typically associated with idol worship), and "children" the offspring of actual sexual acts. "Fornication" in verse 20 is Strong's 4203: to prostitute one's body to the lust of another, to give one's self to unlawful sexual intercourse. This leads one to believe that Jezebel and her cohort in Thyatira were in some way prostituting Page 3 of 10  their bodies through frequent sexual perversions whether it be with married or unmarried people. "Fornication" in verse 21 in Strong's is 4202 which is the Greek word "porneia." Strong's says it means: illicit sexual intercourse, adultery, fornication, homosexuality, lesbianism, intercourse with animals etc. sexual intercourse with close relatives; sexual intercourse with a divorced man or woman; of the defilement of idolatry, as incurred by eating the sacrifices offered to idols. It is a very broad term that means all kind of sexual perversion. I believe this Jezebel-like woman in Thyatira was seducing and corrupting the servants of the Most High to commit awful fleshly sins. I believe she was committing fornication or adultery with other church members, or she was notoriously committing such acts with others outside the church and then presenting herself as an upstanding church member (like what goes on at practically every church in America) or both. Strong's says "that woman" can either mean "woman" or "thy wife." As I mentioned last Sunday, Clark says that this bad woman at Thyatira was the wife of the bishop of the church. If what Clarke says is true, the elder failed to reprove his wife for her sin and iniquity. And, this church let it go on, unchecked. As Jezebel was an instrument to bring King Ahab to worship Baal, this Jezebel-like woman at Thyatira was an instrument to bring false doctrine into the church. I believe her sins including teaching/preaching, fornication/adultery, spiritual idolatry and worshipping false Gods. By a false spiritualism she led the Church into the grossest carnality. The church members were both passive and active in the allowance of these awful sins and they allowed Satan and leaven to enter the Church. And I (God) Gave Her (Jezebel) Space to Repent of Her Fornication, and She Repented Not ­ Divine vengeance was delayed for Jezebel for quite some time. Jezebel had the time between when Elijah told her that the Lord had said that dogs would eat her, until her death to repent and she did not. In addition, she lived approximately 10 years after Ahab's brutal death so the Lord gave her plenty of time to repent. She was particularly hard-hearted and rebellious. She was evil to the core and never repented of all of her murder, lies, witchcraft, idol worship and sexual impurities. She was completely incorrigible and instead of repenting of her sins she continued to engage in them right up until her death. This is the same kind of spirit that dwelled in this female member of the church at Thyatira and the implication is that He gave this woman space to repent and she repented not. Page 4 of 10  Behold, I Will Cast Her Into A Bed And Them That Commit Adultery With Her Into Great Tribulation, Except They Repent Of Their Deeds ­ The Lord Jesus Christ, with eyes of a flaming fire, and feet as fine brass makes a positive threat or promise (I will ­ not I may). The promise is that if she (Jezebel, and the Jezebel like woman at Thyatira) and those that similarly engage in such activity do not repent He will cast them into a bed of great tribulation. When the verse says I will cast her into a bed and them that commit adultery with her, I think it has several meanings. It refers to the fact that the sins of adultery, fornication and sodomy primarily take place in a bed so He is going to repay their sinful deeds with a bed of suffering that they are not going to like. In addition, I will cast her into a bed and them that commit adultery with her refers to this woman's specific and various lovers... but the primary meaning is much broader. If you commit adultery (sex with a married person not your spouse) or if you commit adultery as Christ defined it in Luke 17:18 (whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery), then you have figuratively put yourself in that same bed with Jezebel and you will receive her fate ­ a bed of great tribulation. That saying comes to mind: You have made your bed and now you must lie in it. This includes all those that engage in adultery, fornication, homosexuality, and so forth, both real and spiritual. The bed represents a bed of affliction/pain/anguish or a sick bed. God is going to deal extremely harshly with all of them that engage in sexual filthiness, such as being thrown out of a tower head first (the way that Jezebel was killed). Some people say that we are old fashioned, that we are not keeping up with the times, that it is the law of this land to accept this, that everyone does it, that God loves everyone and that Jesus forgives all. Beloved, instead, just call us realists ­ because these words from Christ on the throne are none of those things. This is crystal clear condemnation and I often forget Thyatira, but these are powerful and expansive words of judgment spoken by Christ on the throne about sexual perversion. He is not going to wink at their transgression forever. These people in these churches all around us (think nine dead in Charleston) and all over the world that claim to be Christians and wink at these sins of fornication/adultery/homosexuality and worshipping false gods and idols, with reckless abandon and no restraint, are crazy. Beloved, there is no repenting going on for their adultery/fornication (hetero or homosexual). Page 5 of 10  There is ad-nauseaum, grandiose talk in this society and this generation about God, and prayer, and Bible studies, supposed godliness, all day every day, and yet it is uncontroverted fact all of these churches in this country and world are awash with sexual and idolatrous perversion and filthiness from top to bottom. Why they would entertain the idea that they can get away with it, when this church at Thyatira could not, makes no sense. Sin has clouded their minds and God has given them a strong delusion that they should believe a lie. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men (Isa 29:13). This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. (Mt 15:8-9). One of my children found out that back in the day they used to criminally prosecute people for adultery and he was quite offended they still don't. The tribulation that Jezebel and her ilk will receive will be widespread, severe and include death. And I Will Kill Her (Jezebel's) Children with Death and All the Churches Shall Know That I am He Which Searcheth the Reins and Hearts ­ This verse is aimed at this woman at Thyatira and her children (which go her way). In the Old Testament, the Lord prematurely killed all of Jezebel's children. Regarding this woman at Thyatira, this refers to the actual offspring that most likely came out of these adulterous and fornicating relationships, as well as those that follow in her footsteps and lay in the same bed she has, following her lead. "I will kill her children with death" refers to the second death, hell ­ where there is no reprieve, no time off, no hope of future life ­ only everlasting shame, pain and contempt. The purpose is to openly put fear in the Churches, so they do not walk in this path. Christ inasmuch says: I will kill and certainly destroy her offspring and her memory and thereby ruin her design. So, why is it important for Christ to kill her children? You find the answer in 2 Chronicles 21:4-6. Jehoram, King of Judah took to wife Athaliah, the daughter of King Ahab (King of Israel) and Jezebel. Jehoram did not follow the LORD like his father Jehoshaphat. He did evil in the sight of the Lord and his filthy wife Page 6 of 10  Athaliah, moved him to do so. Athaliah, no doubt taught by her wicked mother, following the lead of Eth-baal, convinced Jehoram to murder all his brethren and so introduced the heathen murderous ways of Tyre and Sidon and Israel to Judah together with and their filthy gods. And, when Jehoram was dead and her son Ahaziah was dead, Athaliah then slew all of Ahaziah's children that she could find (she missed one), her own grandchildren. One of our members thinks she did it, moved by Satan to disprove the prophesy that the line of Christ would come through King David. This is the daughter of Jezebel! Now, you see why a sovereign God would want to kill her children with death! If you keep the children of Jezebel around and alive they will do great damage to the people of God and the Church and they in their sin are an example to the other churches. Christ is again, making a promise of extreme judgment. I will kill her children with death. Christ threatens from the throne to kill this Jezebel-like woman's actual children and put them in hell. He is going to make an example out of them and all that engage in such conduct and all the churches will know that He searches the reigns and hearts. So much for "God loves everyone" and "Jesus loves me this I know." Jezebel and her children are headed for the lake of fire. They won't be able to argue their way out of this condemnation ­ Christ knows what is in their heart and He is going to hold them accountable for such behavior. Beloved, Christ is not going to take vengeance on just them, but on them and the horse they rode up on, ... and your children too. He is serious about this sin and your cavalier thoughts about these sins of sexual perversion and idolatry are not in line with Christ's thinking on the throne. And I Will Give unto Every One of you According to Your Works - Satan would deceive you to have you believe that God loves everyone and there is no judgment and no hell and no accountability for your sins. Make no mistake about this, Christ says there is judgment coming based on your works. "We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad" (2 Cor. 5:10). "For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting" (Gal. 6:8). Page 7 of 10  For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil (Ec. 12:14). And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be (Re. 22:12). Christ makes it clear that every person will reap what they sow. But Unto the Rest in Thyatira, As Many as Have Not This Doctrine, and Which Have Not Known the Depths of Satan, as They Speak; I Will Put Upon You None Other Burden, But That Which ye Have Already Hold Fast Till I Come - The Lord Jesus Christ now addresses those good and faithful servants in the Church at Thyatira that had not accepted or given credence to the doctrines of Jezebel which had been introduced into that church. Christ refers to these abominable doctrines of fornication, adultery, sacrificing unto idol and worshipping false gods as being "the depths of Satan." Shut up, Mr. and Mrs. Superstar adulterers, the Lord Jesus Christ just said these sins are the depths of Satan. I don't care how you characterize it, but that is good enough for me. Beloved, we must keep our garments clean from the depths of Satan and keep Satan out of the church. God Almighty puts no other burden on us but to keep ourselves from this kind of filthiness, to protest it when we see it and to hold fast till Christ comes! Hold fast means: to have power, be powerful, to be chief, be master of, to rule, to get possession of, to take hold of, take, seize, to lay hands on one in order to get him into one's power, to not discard or let go, to keep carefully and faithfully. Everyone in the free world is going to be discarding these things and eating them up, but you have to hold fast and not give an inch. And He That Overcometh, and Keepeth My Works Unto the End, I Will Give Power Over the Nations and He Shall Rule Them With a Rod of Iron; as the Vessels of a Potter Shall They be Broken to Shivers: Even as I Have Received of my Father. He that overcomes the likes of Jezebel and her children along with those that approve and enable others to commit adultery, fornication and idol worship; and instead keeps His works (public work of the ministry, private works of faith and obedience and the fruits of the spirit) until either death or the Day of Judgment; wonderful things will be imparted to him! The words "I will give power" literally mean "authority." The Lord Jesus Christ will give the saints of God authority over Page 8 of 10  the nations and over the whole earth! They will rule with Christ from the throne of judgment and judge, condemn and punish the enemies of Christ and the Church. I will declare the decree: the LORD hath said unto me..., Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. Psalm 2:7-9 The scepter or rod of iron is what is used to beat others and represent rigorous rule. Our great Messiah will rule the nations with great strength and domination. He will not be opposed and all people will be in subjection to Him. Any power that would arise to oppose His rule or His government will be utterly destroyed because of their failure to conform to the design of God. And I Will Give Him the Morning Star. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. ­ Christ Jesus is called the bright and morning star in Revelation 22:16: "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star." The gross darkness of this world (Isa 60:2) shall be replaced by the bright and morning star which will shine forth over the whole world. Christ will bring the perfection of light into our souls! What a wonderful gift. The planet Venus is sometimes called the "morning star" because it appears quite bright at the first morning light during certain times of the year. Venus pales in comparison to the true Morning Star. The light of Christ is the ultimate power and light in the universe and He will be given to His bride! You will take possession of the one true thing you want, to bask in the love and affection of Christ in a personal and spiritual manner for eternity. I love you all. Amen. Page 9 of 10  JEZEBELS' REIGN & INFLUENCE OVER BOTH ISRAEL AND JUDAH  KINGS OF ISRAEL (34 years)  KINGS OF JUDAH (19 years)  KING AHAB & JEZEBEL (21 YEARS) - Prophets of God murdered by Jezebel (1 Kings 18:4) - Naboth and his sons murdered by Jezebel (1 Kings 21) - Ahab and Jezebel served Baal  KING JEHOSHAPHAT - Son = Jehoram (Joram)  - Son = Ahaziah; Daughter = Athaliah; - Son = Jehoram KING AHAZIAH (2 YEARS) - He served Baal (1 Kings 22:53) - Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber; Elijah told Ahaziah's messengers he would die and he did (2 Kings 1:2-4; 1:17). Ahaziah sent captains (50 men) to take and kill Elijah and fire came down from heaven and destroyed 2 sets of the 50. - He went to war along with King Joram (Israel) against Syria at Ramothgilead and King Joram was wounded (2 Chronicles 22:5). KING JORAM (JEHORAM) (11 YEARS) - Son of Ahab - Joram goes to Ramothgilead and gets wounds. He is visited by King Ahaziah, because he is sick and Jehu slays them both (2 Chronicles 22:8) King Jehu  KING JEHORAM & ATHALIAH (12 YEARS) - Jehoram murdered all his brethren at Athaliah's bidding (2 Chronicles 21:4) - Elijah tells him his bowels will be diseased and will fall out and he will be dead (occurs over 2 painful years) (2 Chronicles 21:15). - Son = Ahaziah KING AHAZIAH ( 1 YEAR) - His mother (Athaliah) was his counselor (2 Chronicles 22:3) - Jehu slays him (2 Chronicles 22:8). QUEEN ATHALIAH (6 YEARS) - Murdered the royal seed (except for Joash, who was hidden) 2 Kings 11:1. - She reigns 6 years and is killed by a coup at the hands of Jehoiada the priest and Joash reigns.  Page 10 of 10  
