Sunday, August 10, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen...Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her." Rev. 18:2,20.  Babylon ­ both as a great city and a great whore ­ is the standing symbol of all false religious systems; and as such, Babylon stands for all the murderous enemies of God against the Lord's people on earth. There is a constant, deadly, spiritual warfare going on at all times between the church of the Lord Jesus Christ on earth ­ sometimes called the church militant ­ and Babylon. The holy angels are assigned to deal with Babylon now on behalf of the saints in their constant suffering at her hands; to wit: "There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. FOR HE SHALL GIVE HIS ANGELS CHARGE OVER THEE, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone (i.e., lest the least bit of harm come to thee)." (Psa. 91:10-12) Beloved, we are engaged in a great spiritual conflict ­ a holy warfare ­ and we must think that way constantly. "Thou therefore endure hardness (or, hardships), as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier." 2 Tim. 2:3,4. This is a matter about which we may ­ and ought to be ­ bold in our thinking and acting; to wit: "But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present with that confidence, wherewith I think to be bold against some, which think of us AS IF WE WALKED ACCORDING TO THE FLESH. For though we walk in the flesh, WE DO NOT WAR AFTER THE FLESH: (For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled." (2 Cor. 10:2-6) In other words, this matter of thinking of our present lives on earth as being a constant spiritual warfare against the great whore of Babylon and the great city of Babylon ­ requiring the constant assistance of myriads of holy angels ­ is a matter of great importance with Paul ­ a matter about which he is ready to get kind of testy. See how he carries on; to wit: "Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? If any man trust to himself that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that, as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's" ­ (and on and on he goes, putting his very authority as an apostle at stake)." (2 Cor. 10:7)  Sunday, August 10, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  "The Lord is a man of war." (Ex. 15:3)  "(He is called) Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war." (Rev. 19:11)  Suffice it to say that this matter was extremely important to Paul ­ and it ought to be to us. It's importance to God is reflected in that an important contingency of God's holy angels has been assigned to constantly help us ­ day and night ­ to guarantee us victory in every battle of this holy war; to wit: "This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, AND DELIVERETH THEM (that is, the holy angels give them victory in every least skirmish of this holy war)." Psa. 34:6,7.  Remember, Beloved, that these mighty creatures function in their holy duties directly from heaven, the abode of God, and are called "the angels of heaven." Mat. 24:36. They are said "to always behold the face of the Father which is in heaven." Mat. 18:10. And they are elsewhere often represented as before the throne of God, or surrounding his throne in heaven, and sent from thence, and descending from thence on messages to this world. E.g.: "And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. And, behold, the Lord stood above it." Gen. 28:12,13. Just one of these mighty angels of God slew 185 thousand Assyrian troops under Sennacherib. Did not the Lord God pledge that He Himself would defend the city to save it for his own sake, and for His servant David's sake? And did He not assign one of His holy angels to do that job? To wit:  "Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses." (Isa. 37:35)  And is it not so, Beloved, that our God has given to us many such exceeding great and precious promises, accompanied by many all-inclusive assurances of victory in all the wars of the Lord; to wit: "And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, ALL POWER is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations." Mat. 28:18,19. And, "Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us." Rom. 8:37. And, "Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place." 2 Cor. 2:14. But, Beloved, even though we are guaranteed the Lord's deliverance ­ including angelic help at every stage of the warfare ­ it is still a real warfare, and the great whore of Babylon is still "drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus," (Rev. 17:6), ­ "And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth." Rev. 18:24.  Moreover, about the beast that rose up out of the sea of restless and filthy mankind, of Rev. 13, it is written: "And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him (allowed of God) to MAKE WAR WITH THE SAINTS, and overcome them (i.e., temporarily, with only  Sunday, August 10, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  light afflictions; to wit: "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a  far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 2 Cor. 4:17.); "and power was given him  over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship  him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation  of the world." Rev. 13:6-8.  And now, Beloved, is it not altogether appropriate for those same blessed and holy angels ­ (also called the Elect Angels; to wit: "I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and THE ELECT ANGELS, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality." 1 Tim. 5:21) ­ I say, is it not altogether appropriate for those same holy angels who for some 6,000 years managed the safe-keeping of God's elect humans in their warfare with the great whore Babylon ­ and who thereby acquired experience and expertise as to all of Babylon's battlefield techniques ­ for those same savvy angels to manage the final overthrow of Babylon? ­ thereby triggering shouts of joy from deep space, as it were. To wit:  "And after these things I saw another ANGEL COME DOWN FROM HEAVEN, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory" ­ (and if it be contended that this angel is the Lord Jesus Christ, that does not alter the case, because it was always the Lord Jesus directly controlling all the angels anyway, and it is also a great tribute and honor for all the angelic hosts that when time comes for the final overthrow of Babylon, the Lord Jesus takes the form of an angel for the task) -- "And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, BABYLON THE GREAT IS FALLEN, IS FALLEN, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird." (Rev. 18:1,2)  The doom of Babylon has arrived. Metaphors are mixed and tumble over each other ­ but for the most part it is amazingly clear what they mean. Babylon is a great whore in the first verse of Chapter 17 ­ but by the last verse of Chapter 17, the great whore has glided into a great city; to wit: "And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth." (Rev. 17:18)  "For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities" ­ (i.e., God has determined to take up the mighty sins of all mankind except His Elect, for the purpose of meting out punishment for each of the sins of all mankind). Rev. 18:5. The matter of vengeance against all mankind for the way they persecuted God's elect is first and foremost; to wit: "Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double." Rev. 18:6. Vengeance, retribution, recompense, ­ is shown to be the primary subject of this horrendous scene ­ all as prophesied from the foundation of the world; to wit:  Sunday, August 10, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it is THE VENGEANCE OF THE LORD: take VENGEANCE upon her; as she hath done, do unto her." (Jer. 50:15) "Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? To me belongeth VENGEANCE, AND RECOMPENCE; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste...If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render VENGEANCE to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of REVENGES upon the enemy. Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will AVENGE the blood of his servants, and will render VENGEANCE to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people." (Deut. 32:34,35,41-43) Notice this ancient passage from Moses declares that massive REJOICING follows the massive outpourings of divine VENGEANCE. Even so, unfettered joy and rejoicing will only come when unfettered divine VENGEANCE is poured out on Babylon. Look again at our text; to wit: "REJOICE over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets" ­ and why? ­ "for God hath AVENGED you on her. And a mighty angel" ­ (angelic management of the holy destruction of Babylon is a divine part of angelic ministrations to God's Elect; to wit: "Are they (angels) not ALL ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" Heb. 1:14) ­ I say, "And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all... And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth." Rev. 18:20,21,24. And then ­ BANG ! "And after these things" ­ (what things? the final doom of Babylon! That's what!) ­ I say, "And AFTER THESE THINGS I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God." Rev. 19:1. What triggered this unparalleled paean of praise, that thundered from Heaven, seemingly, as it were, as from the deep recesses of space? Here's what triggered it; to wit:  "FOR HE HATH JUDGED THE GREAT WHORE...AND HATH AVENGED THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS AT HER HAND." Rev. 19:2.  Sunday, August 10, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  That is the FIRST WAVE of praise to God for vindicating His servants at long last. After long,  wearisome centuries and ages ­ and even millenniums ­ of unrelenting, bloody persecutions at  her hand, the servants of God are finally and fully AVENGED ! So much for the first wave of  praise for God's vengeance upon Babylon.  Comes now the SECOND WAVE of praise to God for His vengeance upon Babylon; to wit: "And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rose up for ever and ever." (That is, she's in Hell. See Rev. 14:11.) Rev. 19:3.  Comes now the THIRD WAVE of praise to God for vindicating or avenging His people on Babylon, this time emphasizing the active participation of the true churches and pastors who have suffered so much at her hand; to wit: "And the four and twenty elders ­ (i.e., standing for the true New Testament churches from the days of Christ on earth to the end of the world) ­ and the four beasts" ­ (i.e., four living creatures, or, pastors, standing for the pastors of the true New Testament churches) ­ "these all fell down and worshiped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen; Alleluia." Rev. 19:4.  Comes now the FOURTH WAVE of praise to God for His vengeance upon those who have persecuted His own dear people; to wit: "And a voice came out of the throne" ­ (evidently the Son, calling for praise of the Father for His faithfulness in avenging the Elect pursuant to His (i.e., the Son's) promise: `And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.' Luke 18:7,8.) ­ "saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great." Rev. 19:5.  Comes now the FIFTH WAVE of praise to God for at long last executing His vengeance upon the great whore for persecuting His people; to wit: "And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. Let us...REJOICE." Rev. 19:6,7. Beloved, this will be a blessed day for us, and it is a day that is very near and dear to the heart of God; to wit: "For the day of vengeance is IN MINE HEART, and the year of my redeemed is come." Isa. 63:4.  It is called "the day of vengeance of our God;" and the very anticipation of that day is most acceptable to the Lord, and is calculated to bring comfort to the hearts of God's elect, who often go mourning through life as a direct consequence of the fierce and bloody persecutions which they endure at the hand of Babylon; to wit:  "To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the DAY OF VENGEANCE of our God; to comfort all that mourn; To appoint unto THEM THAT MOURN IN ZION, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." Isa. 61:2,3.  Look again at our text; to wit: "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen...REJOICE over her, thou heaven (or, all the inhabitants of Heaven), and ye holy apostles and prophets; for GOD HATH AVENGED you on her." Rev. 18:2,20.  Sunday, August 10, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  The joy of the saints at this stage of their everlasting journey of experiences and activities ­ I say, the joy and rejoicing of the saints at the final doom of Babylon, is described in words such as these; to wit: "ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory." 1 Pet. 1:8. Wave after wave of praise and thanksgiving to God, with joy unspeakable and full of glory. What a day that will be. It is blessed just to contemplate; to wit: "Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, YOUR GOD WILL COME WITH VENGEANCE, even God with a RECOMPENCE; he will come and save you." (Isa. 35:3,4)  Nor is God's visitation of wrath and vengeance upon Babylon to be considered as a mere metaphoric abstraction. Each individual human being is intended. People go to Hell ­ not abstractions. At the beginning of this sermon, I said that Babylon ­ both as a great city and a great whore ­ is and has always been, the standing symbol of all false religious systems, and as such Babylon stands for all the murderous enemies of God (i.e., individual PEOPLE) against the Lord's people on earth ­ from Adam and Cain to the end of the world. And, we know the names, and identities otherwise, of the bloody and murderous PEOPLE who go to make up the Babylon that has oppressed Westboro Baptist Church during the past 53 years in this place. The fall of Babylon refers to each of those PEOPLE ­ and all others having anything whatsoever to do with those PEOPLE ­ being cast forthwith into Hell, and tormented there with fire and brimstone by the holy angels and the Lamb, day and night, for ever and ever; to wit:  "For true and righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand...And her smoke" ­ (i.e., the smoke from the fire and brimstone with which the PEOPLE going to make up the abstract Babylon, and who personally persecuted the saints, are being tormented) ­ THAT "smoke rose up for ever and ever." (Rev. 19:2,3)  Make no mistake. At the time of the fall of Babylon ­ (i.e., the time when the mighty angel shouts, "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen...Rejoice." Rev. 18:2,20) ­ all talk in abstractions and metaphors is over. That must be one of the things the righteous are so thrilled with joy about. Reality has now set in with a deadly earnest. It is divine vengeance time. Cut to the chase. The impenitent thugs who persecuted us at Westboro Baptist Church ­ most of whom we know very well ­ are now suffering the torments of the eternally damned in Hell. And we can see them in Hell, as we assist the Savior in administering their unspeakably painful torment. And we are filled with "joy unspeakable and full of glory" ­ as we join with our beloved brethren in wave after wave of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord for the excruciating pain being inflicted upon the beasts who while on earth attempted by bloody persecutions to stop us from preaching the Gospel.  "Rejoice over her" ­ why? ­ "for God hath avenged you on her." (Rev. 18:20) Amen.  
