Sunday, February 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold,  whose height was threescore cubits (about 100 feet),  and the breadth thereof of six cubits (about 10 feet): he  set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon...  And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the  same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery  furnace." Dan. 3:1,6.  This gripping story of the heroism of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego used to be told and retold in Sunday schools throughout the land. But it looks like those days are gone, and nowadays Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are branded as trouble-makers, and the hero is the tyrant King Nebuchadnezzar (i.e., Antichrist Beast Obama, prophetically typified by the bloody king Nebuchadnezzar). Beloved, we are talking about a state religion. We are talking about the Great Whore riding the Scarlet Beast, having illicit sex with the kings of the earth (i.e., chiefs of state by whatever title), and sitting on many waters (meaning that she dominates the whole world). Rev. 17. This amazing drama in Dan., chapter 3, is a Holy Ghost-recorded study in Ancient Babylon's coercive state religion; and I tell you right up front that it is a study ­ simultaneously ­ of Antichrist Beast Obama's bloody American State Religion.  In the summer of 2006 Obama made a speech at a conference entitled "From Poverty to Opportunity: a Covenant for a New America," wherein Obama said, "America is no longer a Christian nation, and traditionalists should wake up to the realities of a pluralistic society. No longer are the commands of God welcomed in the public square. That call is to the larger project of American renewal!" That was Obama's vision for big-government intrusion, a code phrase for the New Frontier and Great Society programs of a new age.  I tell you, Beloved, these things are frightening. And Obama goes on: It was a call for "traditional Christians" to surrender their values, to become "politically correct." "This is what some referred to with sarcasm as Obama's call to join the `AMERICAN CHURCH OF PLURALISM !!!' They meant, A TEMPLE OF STATE RELIGION, in which all faiths are welcome, but in which ALL MUST BOW THE KNEE TO AN OFFICIAL CULT OF REASON, in which all have a claim, but ONLY IF THEY DEFER TO THE RELIGIOUS NEUTRALITY OF THE DEMOCRATIC WAY !!!" Beloved, do not we follow a more heavenly call, a call to do the very opposite than Obama and his new State Religion demands? To wit:  "And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God." (Rom. 12:2)  "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever." (1 Jn. 2:15-17)  Sunday, February 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself." (Phil. 3:20-21)  "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory." (Col. 3:1-4)  These precious verses serve to remind us that we are responding to higher and holier impulses or callings than those of Obama to the idolatrous worship of his "Civic Religion" at his "Altars of State." Our text for today suggests that it was, "in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon," that Satan first entered into and energized an ancient tyrant ­ (who typified Obama) ­ I say, Satan moved Nebuchadnezzar to formulate an idolatrous State Religion in the form of a giant golden image, and to set the thing up in the plain of Dura, and to order everybody in the world to bow down and worship the monster, on pain of death. That tyrant King was a type of the Antichrist Beast Obama, the final and greatest such tyrant; whom Satan has also entered and is moving and energizing to set up a vile, one-world, idolatrous, religious system and hierarchy ­ headed up by sodomite religious leaders like out-of-the-closet religious rumprangers, such as Episcopal Bishop Vicki Eugenia Robinson of New Hampshire.  I tell you, Beloved, Washington, D.C. is situated in the Plain of Dura, in the Province of Babylon, where Antichrist Obama is working night and day on his pet project; to wit: his world-wide system of sodomite idolatry. And his pattern or model for us to study in waging spiritual war against him is Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. Dan., chapter 3. In fact, Washington, D.C. ought to change her name to Babylon in the Plain of Dura, or Babylon, P.D.  The international media, as well as the national media, literally swarm around Obama, giving his Bully Pulpit of Satanic Lies unprecedented international power. One said on the Morning Joe MSNBC TV Show recently, that "Obama is the most popular living person in history." Another spoke of his "kind eyes," and yet another fairly swooned as he praised his "intelligent sincerity." All this must be, and is, one of the most amazing and supernatural proofs that he is Antichrist. But I warn you, Beloved, and all mankind, that this situation will all dramatically and abruptly change, and his true nature of cruelty and bestiality will emerge; to wit: "And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, A KING OF FIERCE COUNTENANCE, and understanding dark sentences (the occult), shall stand up. And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power (but by the indwelling Satanic power): and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper (briefly) ... And through his policy also he shall cause treachery to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also STAND UP AGAINST THE PRINCE OF PRINCES; but he shall be broken without hand (i.e., without human hand)." (Dan. 8:23-25)  Sunday, February 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  We have seen the end of Obama the Antichrist Beast, and it is indeed to be without human  hand; to wit:  "And the BEAST was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the BEAST, and them that worshipped his image. THESE BOTH WERE CAST ALIVE INTO A LAKE OF FIRE BURNING WITH BRIMSTONE." (Rev. 19:20)  There you have it, Beloved. The final end and doom of Obama, the Antichrist Beast, is irreversibly predestinated by a Sovereign God. Twist and turn as he may. Strut and preen and swagger as he will. His millions of fag friends cannot save him. His fancy oratory may even be detrimental to him, because he used it to slander and blaspheme the Almighty. "But he shall be broken without hand," confined forever in the "lake of fire burning with brimstone." Dan. 8:25; Rev. 19:20.  A fitting end for the tyrant whose type and predecessor in crime against God's elect had attempted ­ some 2,500 years earlier ­ in a rage and fury ­ to burn Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego to an ash, in a burning fiery furnace, heated "one seven times more than it was wont to be heated." Dan. 3:19. Beloved, this is serious business. We may be required to display our own fidelity, to the same glorious God, and under the same dangerous circumstances as these courageous Hebrews; to wit:  "(Fall down and worship the golden image!) But if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and WHO IS THAT GOD THAT SHALL DELIVER YOU OUT OF MY HANDS? Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up." (Dan. 3:15-18)  We may expect Obama to act in utmost bad faith in this matter. Remember that King Nebuchadnezzar is our pattern and type of Obama to come. A short time before this unforgettable event, rather than blaspheme God with mandatory idolatrous super-image worship under pain of death, this two-faced, fork-tongued king Nebuchadnezzar was praising the one true God and promoting Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to positions of great Honor and lavish gifts; to wit:  "Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him. The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that YOUR GOD IS A GOD OF GODS, AND A LORD OF KINGS, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret. Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon. Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set  Sunday, February 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, over the affairs of the province of  Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king." (Dan. 2:46-49)  And then, beginning at the very next verse, this double-minded, two-faced king ­ in utmost bad faith and duplicity ­ erects a world-famous idolatrous image, orders the whole world to worship the thing, and throws Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego into a burning fiery furnace for NOT worshipping the dead, deaf, dumb and blind image. I say, utmost bad faith is thus seen in the type of Antichrist to come; which makes it highly likely that Antichrist Obama himself will most certainly and to a grievous degree, act in utmost bad faith toward us and all God's elect.  Furthermore, we ought to expect that some kind of monstrous golden image will be set up in our Plain of Dura, in our Province of Babylon ­ or something that answers to it in all its vital functions and particulars ­ such as a universal claim upon that full devotion and exclusive worship which legitimately belongs to God alone.  One such thing comes to mind, and which I mentioned earlier; to wit: THE STATE. What if Obama rests his entire Presidency upon the vile, inanimate proposition that all patriotic citizens are obliged to WORSHIP THE STATE? Not just pay taxes and obey the law. But actually WORSHIP THE STATE, even as it was with the inanimate, 100-foot tall monstrosity standing ­ quiet and motionless ­ in the Plain of old Dura, in the Province of Babylon. But, you say, surely Obama is not stupid enough to think that he can talk the intelligent masses of the American electorate to actually WORSHIP THE STATE !!!  Such that the National Anthem and other patriotic songs attain the status of hymns of worship and praise to God and the Lord Jesus Christ. Surely not. And the many scheduled patriotic holidays on the calendar every year, plus untold numbers of patriotic meetings ­ worship services ­ in between. A National Church, where the STATE IS WORSHIPPED AS GOD. Far-fetched? Not so.  There is something about the great rallies of people who throng to hear Obama wherever he goes, that reminds me of nothing so much as Billy Graham evangelistic meetings when I was young. I'm talking late 1940s and early 1950s. There is also something about Obama's rallies that reminds me of Hitler's massive political meetings where Hitler whipped the German people into fanatical worship of the State, with disastrous consequences.  Perhaps the German philosopher Friedrich Hegel best articulated the Satanic concept of StateWorship as a "Divine Idea;" and there is some evidence that Obama has read Hegel's works; to wit: "The State is the Divine Idea as it exists on earth," Hegel wrote."WE MUST THEREFORE WORSHIP THE STATE AS THE MANIFESTATION OF THE DIVINE...The State is the MARCH OF GOD THROUGH THE WORLD." See, A Compilation from Hegel, by Karl R. Popper, The Open Society and It's Enemies, 4th ed, 2 vols, Princeton University Press, 2:31.  I put it to you, Beloved. Does not the handling of, the preparations for, and the execution of, Obama's inauguration/coronation, sound like and look like, the fulfillment of the prophesy suggested by the bizarre incident brought to pass in the Plain of Dura by Nebuchadnezzar so long ago.  Sunday, February 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  Nebuchadnezzar ordered the people to fill the Plain "as far as the eye could see," to worship the evil Babylonian State, which had set up the Great Golden Image ­ complete with patriotic music, entertainment, and capped off by a stirring "God-and-Country" speech heavily laced with idolatrous religion. And attendance by the multimillion-man bureaucracy was mandatory. Even so, Obama, and his "Invitations," to swell the crowd at his inauguration/coronation.  Obama said in a later speech, that it was inspiring at his inauguration to look out and see Americans gathered together "as far as the eye could see;" as though it was a spontaneous affair. As though huge crews of workmen had not been building the 5-story banks of seating around the huge platform and the special accommodations for the elite of the nation and the world. Nor was attendance left to chance. There were "INVITATIONS," and other cute mechanisms to guarantee that the multitudes would be there ­ just as Nebuchadnezzar, Obama's ancient type showed the way; to wit: "Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which he had set up... (and they) were gathered together...and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up...Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, That when ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, (beautiful religious/patriotic music of all kinds), ye fall down and worship the golden image. And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace." (Dan. 3:2-6) King Nebuchadnezzar: Come and bow down, or die in the furnace; President Obama: Come and receive my mark, or die in the market place (i.e., can't buy or sell). Wisdom is needed here to discern good and bad, and hence it is said at the close of Rev., Chapter 13, as to the mark and number of the Obama Beast; to wit: "Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the Beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred three-score and six." (Rev. 13:18) Seiss says: "Six in the Bible is the bad number, and when multiplied by tens and hundreds, it denotes evil in its greatest intensity and most disastrous manifestation. This number of the Beast's name thus gives his standing in the estimate of Heaven. If we can only know the principles pertaining to his badness; if we can only have understanding to detect his spirit which already works so powerfully in so many specious forms around us, we shall have accomplished the most needful reckoning of the number of his name. The moral insight into his nature is the wisdom we require. In this therefore let us try to skill our souls, clinging ever to the only Lord God and His Son Jesus Christ, in meekness, that no stains or marks of the Beast, or his abominations, even in spirit, may ever be found upon our souls." Evil is here; intensest kind. I love you.  Amen.  
