Sunday, June 7, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "In the second year of Pekah, the son of Remaliah, king of Israel,  began Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, to reign. Five  and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he  reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem...And he did that which was  right in the sight of the Lord; he did according to all that his father  Uzziah had done. Howbeit the high places were not removed; the  people sacrificed and burned incense still in the high places. He  built the higher gate of the house of the Lord. Now the rest of the  acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the  book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? (BANG !) In those  days the Lord began to send against Judah, Rezin the king of  Syria, and Pekah the (king of Israel). And Jotham slept with his  fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his  father; and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead." 2 Kgs. 15:32-38.  This relatively short segment of the chain-link succession of the Davidic line and kingdom stretching from David to Christ ­ is filled with glorious things "for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope." Rom. 15:4. It is a divine and miraculous process, whereby the Holy Ghost takes of the things of Christ and reveals them unto us; and whereby the Spirit of Truth guides us into all truth; to wit: "Howbeit, when He the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into ALL TRUTH; for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. All things that the Father hath are mine; therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you." (Jn. 16:13-15)  Thus you see, for example, that at some time near the end of good king Jotham's reign and/or near the beginning of the reign of wicked king Ahaz ­ an imprecise time ("in those days") ­ I say, at that time, the Lord began to move combined armies upon the scene, in a display of His sovereign omnipotence and display of absolute predestination; to wit: "In those days the Lord began to send against Judah (the two southern tribes), Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the (king of Israel, the ten northern tribes)." 2 Kgs. 15:37. Paraphrase the verse, and take the meaning; to wit: In those days of the 21st Century, the Lord began to send vast armies against America, killing multitudes on all sides of the war (soldiers as well as non-combatant, innocent, civilians in the hundreds of thousands in Iraq and Afghanistan); to wit: "For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their steads until the captivity." (1 Chron. 5:22)  Thousands of American troops have died, and many more thousands have been horribly wounded, and the world's economy has tanked. The generals say that our armies are stretched to the breaking point, and our troops are committing suicide in great numbers, and our soldiers, under stress, are killing their fellow soldiers ­ all in evidence that God is not with us and our mighty armies.  Sunday, June 7, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Our God is a God of war and is therefore, by definition, controlling in a special way, all wars, and  all sides of all wars, and all weapons of war and instruments in support of war ­ however  sophisticated ­ and all these things are written in the Book of the Wars of the Lord (Num. 21:14).  The Lord our God is an absolute sovereign, meaning that all things whatsoever are predestinated  by Him, and all things whatsoever that happen in time were decreed to happen in eternity. But,  our God appears to control and regard wars and armies in a special way; to wit:  "And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will IN THE ARMY OF HEAVEN and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" (Dan. 4:35)  "And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and IN RIGHTEOUSNESS HE DOTH JUDGE AND MAKE WAR." (Rev. 19:11)  Aside from any primary considerations of eschatology (i.e., that this passage may primarily refer to the doctrines of last things); I submit that our Lord Jesus is the same yesterday, today and forever (Heb. 13:8), and that He is even now the great Captain and military leader leading the Elect of God to glory, even as He said to Joshua on the eve of the invasion and conquest of the Promised Land; to wit: "And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come... And the Captain of the Lord's host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so." (Josh. 5:14,15)  Beloved, God has a special part in all military matters on this earth. When those militant Muslims flew those planes into the towers in New York, the Pentagon in Washington, and the woods of eastern Pennsylvania on Sept. 11, 2001, killing thousands and launching retaliatory strikes and wars all around the world, God Almighty was in the pilot's seat in each of those planes. In fact, in the dim and distant past before the beginning of time, God Almighty predestinated and planned out to the last and least detail ­ (including putting the ideas and skills in the heads and hands of those militant Muslims to launch the improbable attacks) ­ I say, God did plan and in the fullness of time carry out all related terrors to 9/11.  Any person who denies such a manifest proposition is a demon-possessed Hell-bound blasphemer and atheist. The United States of America ­ the world's only super power ­ has been brought to her knees ­ militarily and financially ­ by nations of dirt-poor Muslims. See, "The Three Trillion Dollar War, (The True Cost of the Iraq Conflict)," by Joseph E. Stiglitz and Linda J. Bilmes. Showing also the Macroeconomic Effects of the several conflicts, leaving the U.S. dangerously unequipped both as to war-fighting weaponry and personnel.  The next day after 9/11 both Pat Robertson and the late Jerry Falwell took to the air waves and all outlets of the mega-media, unconditionally warning America that God had smitten her in outraged punishment for her sodomy, fornication, abortion, incest, adultery, etc. In short, those two Arminian heretics came the closest to telling the truth than at any time in their compromising lives. Well, my dear. The sky fell on Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson. They saw their multimillion dollar ministries crumbling all down around them. They saw contributions drying up like the Red Sea did for Moses and the Children of Israel. It was pitiful. They couldn't wait to get to the world's microphones and TV cameras and apologize. It was embarrassing.  Sunday, June 7, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  The only medicine that could save America, and they pour it all down the drain. The only  medicine for this evil, God-forsaken country is Psa. 127:1 ­ but only Westboro Baptist Church  has a good supply on hand and is ready, willing and able to administer it ­ free of charge. But the  people of this wicked, Christ-rejecting, fornicating, anal-copulating, adulterous country love their  sins more than they want to go to heaven when they die. For them to cope with the spiritually  powerful message of WBC, they must somehow silence the voice of WBC booming in their  consciences. This they do by accepting the godless media's invitation to stigmatize, vilify,  marginalize and demonize WBC. They call it ad hominem; i.e., reduce the argument from its  merits to the character assassination of the messenger. This evil nation stands in the position of  ancient Nineveh in the days of Jonah. On direct orders from God, Jonah, scared from his recent  experience in the whale's belly, acted accordingly; to wit:  "And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying, Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days' journey. And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey (10-15 miles), and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown." (Jonah 3:1-4)  No conditions. No invitation to repent. No reference to God's love ­ only His wrath. Harsh. Pithy. Those people knew what Jonah meant. They knew how they were living. Nineveh had reached the degree of debauchery and moral filth as Sodom. Nobody argued with Jonah about his methods of delivering his stark, cold message. Nobody told poor Jonah that he could catch more flies with honey than he could with all that vinegar he was scattering all over Nineveh. Jonah was not offering those Ninevites any cheap Arminian deals, that if they would just take one step, the Lord would meet them with open arms and take them all the rest of the way ­ by grace. That's turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness. Jude 4. No sir ! "Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown." That's verse 4.  Now look at verse 5; to wit: "So the people of Nineveh believed God (i.e., they believed that in forty days they were going to split Hell wide open, cast therein and tormented for ever by an angry God, who is fed up with their filthy sodomite and fornicating lifestyle) ­ they believed THAT God, "and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing; let them not feed, nor drink water; But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not." Jon. 3:5-10.  The condition of the nation and the world that we find ourselves living in ­ through the providence of God ­ is as bad and probably worse than that of ancient Nineveh ­ (i.e., Assyria, sometimes called Nineveh because of the huge population and greatness of Nineveh as the capital of Assyria, much as Ephraim is often put for Israel, the 10 northern tribes, and the U.S. is often called  Sunday, June 7, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Washington in foreign and diplomatic circles). At any rate, our attitudinal approach to this filthy  nation and this filthy world should be more like Jonah's than any other of our preacher-prophet-  heroes in the Scriptures. And the situation on the ground in ancient Assyria (Nineveh) in the days  of Jonah looks an awful lot like Jonah administered a big batch of WBC medicine ­ (i.e., Psa.  127:1) ­ to the Ninevite patient; to wit:  "Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain." (Psa. 127:1)  Here's the medicine. Take it. Swallow it down. God Almighty is greatly offended by the way this sodomite America has forgotten Him and despised His Word; ergo, the Lord no longer builds the American house; neither does the Lord any longer watch, keep, secure the American nation. Intelligent people recognize the handwriting on the wall about America; to wit: "Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin" ("Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting !" Dan. 5:25,27.).  An interesting email came this week, indicating that there may be a few Americans who have a clue about the true state and condition of this evil nation; to wit: "I agree with your position on the Jews because by killing Jesus they have violated their Covenant with God. I believe that God has removed His blessings and protection, and Israel today is far from being the nation of God's people. America is a sick country, as you say. It is increasingly Godless as the Atheist and Homo agenda continues to spread. A lot of church-going Americans believe that we are blessed and God has a plan for this country. The sad truth is that this country is an Abomination on the Earth, and perhaps this country is the Mother of Harlots, Babylon the Great." See, Rev. 17:5; to wit: "And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH." (Rev. 17:5)  Evidently, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, speaking through the divinely kept, preserved and maintained Scriptures, through the intervening 2,000 years of time, down to the present time of wars and rumors of wars in the days of the spiritually-thriving Westboro Baptist Church, ­ I say, it appears that our Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost have addressed the following words directly to Westboro Baptist Church, to be published abroad in these last of the last days; to wit: "The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it; because they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and, behold, a greater than Jonah is here." (Mat. 12:41)  We at Westboro Baptist Church are in our nineteenth year of daily preaching on the mean streets of this mean and hateful country, and we have kept copious records of all our activities. We are prepared to give competent, weighty, relevant testimony against you filthy, sinful, arrogant, fagloving Americans, that you have gone from bad to worse during the last 19 years, such that your sodomitical condition is quite irreversible.  Only Hell awaits you. Not only will the Ninevites rise in judgment against you, but we at Westboro Baptist Church will also rise in judgment against you, and the world. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.  I love you.  Amen.  
