Sunday, January 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  A few years ago, I published a compendium of Bible truth entitled: The True Origin, Nature, and Final Doom Of All Sodomites, in which I showed in some twenty points, that the horrific subject of Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites is developed throughout the Bible from Genesis to Revelation ­ to be specific, from Gen. 10:19, to wit: ("And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha. These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations."); [in fact, it may be that before the name SODOMITE appeared, practitioners of the filthy lifestyle identifying these vile creatures appeared, and rose in society to dominate the world in the days of Noah, such that same-sex marriage was not only tolerated, but generally and completely was the accepted custom and norm throughout the whole antediluvian world, and was the precipitating cause of God destroying the whole world in the days of Noah ­ according to the Babylonian Talmud, as per Ben Hood]; to Rev. 22:15, to wit: ("Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. For without are DOGS [i.e., sodomites, as per Gill, as being filthy, impudent in the face of God, and libidinous], and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolators, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.")  In organizing this sermon, it seemed best to set forth the end game in some detail, and show forth the final doom of all sodomites and sodomite enablers. Gill: "For without are DOGS" (Rev. 22:15) ­ `That is, without the holy city are such persons who are comparable to DOGS for their filthiness, impudence, and voraciousness, as are persecutors, heretics, and apostates, Matt. 7:6, Phil. 3:2, 2 Pet. 2:22." Tracing the reasoning of Gill in the selection of proof texts is an enlightening experience. For example, Matt. 7:6 provides: "Give not that which is holy unto the DOGS, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you." (Matt. 7:6)  Here is, indeed, an amazing passage of Holy Writ. All Fags, in our considerable front-line experience ­ are snarling haters of truth and righteousness. Is it not so? Thus they have the disposition of hostile pit bulls, and that hostility is triggered immediately on any street, neighborhood, or public park or other public venue ­ I say the very instant the true Gospel is faithfully preached to them. Matt. 7:6 is a wonderful verse. DOGS were unclean creatures under the law of Moses; the price of one might not be brought into the house of the Lord, for a vow, Deut. 23:17,18 (and this passage from the civil and criminal law of Moses ought to be preached up, as the old preachers used to say, to wit: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a DOG" ­ i.e., a sodomite, as the close juxtaposition clearly shows ­ "the price of a DOG, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God." Deut. 23:17,18.  When one considers that money is fungible, this passage is all the more remarkable. When one brings money into the Lord's house as an offering to God, or in payment of the fulfillment of a vow, money tainted by having been once held by a filthy whore or sodomite is not acceptable. But, you say, How can I know where the money came from back down the line or chain of possession? Well, that may be difficult, to be sure. But the burden is upon you not to bring fag-  Sunday, January 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  tainted money into the Lord's house. It shows how careful one must be in having anything  whatsoever to do with filthy whores and sodomites. The same thought is expressed in another  equally-remarkable passage of Scripture found at Jude 21-25 ("hating even the garment spotted  by the flesh"); to wit: "Keep yourselves in the love of God"­ i.e., keep active, accurate thoughts  ever-present in your mind about the selective and altogether discriminating love of God, and such  evidence that exists that you are one of those highly-favored few who are recipients of that love ­  i.e., make your calling and election sure [2 Pet. 1:10] ­ I say, "Keep yourselves in the love of  God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have  compassion, making a difference; And others save with fear" ­ [i.e., dangling them as a  poisonous insect over the fires of Hell, as described by Jonathan Edwards in his world-famous  sermon, Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God] ­ "pulling them out of the fire; hating even the  garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to  present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only wise God  our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen." Jude 1:21-  25.  All the important Jewish expositors of the Old Testament Scriptures generally equate DOGS with SODOMITES. For example, Isaac Abarbanel (1437-1509), according to the Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, was "The last Jewish exegete of importance," and, "Abarbanel held a place of some importance in the history of Christian exegesis due to the facts that he appreciated and quoted freely the earlier Christian exegetes and that many of his own writings were in turn condensed and translated by Christian scholars of the next two centuries." Thus Abarbanel was a fair example of genuine and reliable Jewish Old Testament commentary. Abarbanel understood "DOG" to be figuratively a "SODOMITE," because of his filthiness, impudence, and his voracious libidinousness; and the price of such an one to be the gain he got by the prostitution of his body to unnatural lusts. The word for whore in this passage properly signifies an HOLY ONE (!); and here by the figure of speech known as an ANTIPHRASIS, it signifies an unholy, an impure person, one that is defiled by man. Jarchi interprets the word as a SANCTIFIED ONE, i.e., one set apart to the vilest, unholiest, filthiest lifestyle conceivable. Gill says that, "a whore and a dog (sodomite) are fitly put together, because both are libidinous, impure, and impudent; perhaps the vileness and baseness of the creature is chiefly regarded in this law, to keep up the credit and veneration of sacrifices as sacred things."  Beloved, why do you think the fags of our day strive so mightily to usurp and completely take over and dominate the churches? They are so filthy in all their ways, that they have a concomitant lust for approval. `HOLY ONES,' indeed (!) And, these filthy and cursed-of-God fags have been totally successful in taking over the churches. Not only have they succeeded in bringing the hire of a whore and the price of a dog into the house of God ­ THEY HAVE COMPLETELY TAKEN OVER THE HOUSE OF THE LORD (!) Yes. Nation-wide and world-wide. The signs of the times ­ rightly discerned ­ tell us so. Never has it been so to this extent since the Flood of Noah wiped all fags and fag-enablers off the earth. In about the year 50 AD James addressed the council at Jerusalem as follows: "And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me; Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of the  Sunday, January 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  prophets; as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle  of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set  it up; That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon  whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these things. Known unto  God are all his works from the beginning of the world." (Acts 15:13-18)  Beloved. Thus you see that for the past 2,000 years God has been visiting the Gentiles, taking out of that corrupt mass of Pagan Gentile nations a people for His name. But that holy process was never intended to be indefinite; but was to be strictly limited. And the Gentiles were solemnly warned by the prophets of God that they should not be high-minded, but that they should fear, that if they disobeyed God, He would cast them off, as with the ancient Jews; to wit:  "Well, because of unbelief they (the Jews) were broken off, and thou (the Gentiles) standest by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear; For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell, (the Jews) severity; but toward thee, (the Gentiles) goodness, IF thou continue in his goodness; otherwise THOU (YOU GENTILES) ALSO SHALT BE CUT OFF." (Rom. 11:20-22)  And, Beloved. This is a great and thrilling mystery, that we should make much of, and the more so as we see the Day of the Lord fast approaching; to wit: "For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant OF THIS MYSTERY, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until THE FULNESS OF THE GENTILES BE COME IN." Rom. 11:25. Beloved, dare we to look squarely upon the signs of the times, whilst we rightly divide the word of truth? For 2,000 years immediately past, the Great God's announced program has been to visit the Gentiles to take out of them a people for His Name ­ but only until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. Does that mean until all God's Elect amongst the Gentiles have been called out of the corrupt mass and safely ensconced with all the other Gentile sheep in the fold? Beloved, look around you. Do not the words "imminent," and "fulness of the Gentiles be come in," fairly scream from every news outlet ­ world-wide? [Bang (!) ] Is it not time that our eager eyes should behold that other angel flying in mid-air with Heaven's final warning to the earthdwellers below? To wit:  "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; FOR THE HOUR OF HIS JUDGMENT IS COME; and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:6,7)  Note that this angel is said to have the everlasting gospel to preach to the earth-dwellers, and the gist of that everlasting Gospel is "fear God, give glory to Him, and worship Him," ­ not a word about God loving all you poor sinners, Christ dying for all your sins so you could go to Heaven if you accept Him as your personal Savior, or any such typical Arminian sloppy agape nonsense. Just sharp, crisp, ultimatums ­ "FOR THE HOUR OF HIS JUDGMENT IS COME (!)" Just the opposite from the message and spirit of modern so-called evangelical, or fundamentalist preaching. Where do they get that notion that plain Bible talk may be utterly ignored, and the opposite may be substituted; and those who adhere to the truth are vilified as hate-mongers? In this context, it is a dangerous thing to despise the plain commandments of the dear Lord Jesus, as at Matt. 7:6; to wit: "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you."  Sunday, January 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved, these are not a series of suggestions to His disciples. These are just as much His  commandments as the Ten Commandments, and are covered by the injunction, "He that hath my  commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved  of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." Jn. 14:21. This is serious  business of the highest order. "GIVE NOT THAT WHICH IS HOLY UNTO THE DOGS (THE  SODOMITES, THE FAGS)."  The command is plain, and it is good. I will tell you what I think it means, based on the simple language of the Bible, interpreted in the light of many years of hands-on experience dealing with fags and fag-enablers. I see these vast myriads of sloppy-agape preachers running around all over the globe to make proselytes, telling filthy fags that God loves them, and if they will take Jesus as personal Savior, they can be saved from sin, and go to Heaven at last, and that prayers to God in Jesus' name will deliver them from fag lust, and that God desperately wants them to be saved, but He can't do a thing until you exercise your free will and come to Jesus first.  Gill is a little more polished, but strikes the mark; to wit: "Give not that which is holy to the dogs. Here the phrase is used in a metaphorical sense; and is generally understood of not delivering or communicating the holy word of God, and the truths of the Gospel, comparable to pearls, or the ordinances of it, to persons notoriously vile and sinful; to men, who being violent and furious persecutors, and filthy, impudent blasphemers, are compared to dogs; or to such, who are scandalously vile, impure in their lives and conversations, and are therefore compared to swine. Also, since the subject Christ is upon is reproof, it seems rather to be the design of these expressions, that men should be cautious, and prudent, in rebuking and admonishing such persons for their sins, IN WHOM THERE IS NO APPEARANCE OR HOPE OF SUCCESS; yea, where there is danger of sustaining loss; lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you; that is, despise the admonitions and reproofs given, and hurt the persons who give them, either by words or deeds;" to wit: "He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame; and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth to himself a blot. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee; rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee." Prov. 9:7,8. "Beware of dogs (sodomites, fags),' says the apostle." Phil. 3:2. "While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants (bond slaves) of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage... But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." 2 Pet. 2:22.  There is little question but that fags killed Christ; for, consider, 1) the Sanhedrin first condemned Christ on the night of the eve of His crucifixion, and it is established that the Sanhedrin at that time was laced with sodomites, according to Ezekiel, chapter 8; 2) the Roman ruler who executed Christ was a well-known sodomite; and, 3) it is well established that sodomy was rife in the Roman army, such that it is highly probable that the soldiers who tortured and slew Christ were sodomites. This is the true meaning of the Messianic Psalm 22, at verses 16 and 20; to wit: "For DOGS have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet... Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the DOG." Psa. 22:16,20. Beloved, I am convinced that we have been entrusted with holy knowledge of amazing mysteries by the Lord our God, sounding the true depths of sodomite involvement in Satan's hellish devices. I love you. Amen.  
