Sunday, May 16, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. O thou afflicted, tossed with  tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and  lay thy foundations with sapphires. And I will make thy windows of agates,  and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. And all thy  children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy  children. In righteousness shalt thou be established; thou shalt be far from  oppression; for thou shalt not fear; and from terror; for it shall not come near  thee. Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me; whosoever shall  gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. Behold, I have created the  smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument  for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. No weapon that is  formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against  thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of  the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." Isa. 54:10-17.  The Security of the Believer is a blessed doctrine that God's little sheep never get too much of while they live, and can never get enough of when dying. The old dying preacher in the South was visited at his bedside by his son who was reminding the old preacher of all the sermons he had delivered to his generation, and of all the good he had accomplished during his long life on earth. Whereupon, the old preacher gently interrupted his son, saying, I know that you love me, and that you mean well. But, my son, a dying man doesn't want to hear about the things he has done during his life on earth. A dying man wants to hear about the blood of the everlasting covenant ­ the blood of Jesus Christ ­ which was shed for His people for the total remission of all their sins. Beloved, that's the only source of solid comfort for the soul that is preparing shortly to meet his God; to wit:  "This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them; And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these (sins) is, there is no more offering for sin. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; And having an high priest over the house of God; Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful that promised;) And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works; Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching." (Heb. 10:16-25)  Recall the heavenly wisdom of the old dying preacher; to wit: A dying man doesn't want to hear about the "good" things HE HAS DONE during his life on earth; he rather wants to hear about what the dear Lord Jesus HAS DONE FOR, BY AND THROUGH HIM. Tell us more of the "I WILLS" of a Sovereign God, and the consequent and subservient "YE SHALLS" of the otherwise, utterly helpless creature, man; to wit: "Then WILL I sprinkle clean water upon you, and YE SHALL be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, WILL I cleanse you. A new heart also WILL I give you, and a new spirit WILL I put within you; and I WILL take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I WILL give you an heart of flesh. And I WILL put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. And YE SHALL dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and YE SHALL be my people, and I WILL be your God. I WILL also save you  Sunday, May 16, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  from all your uncleannesses. ... Then SHALL ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that  were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your  abominations." Ezek. 36:25-31. John Trapp: "God undertaketh for himself and his people, too, viz., to  work in them what he requireth of them. Therefore it is an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things,  and the fruits of it are `sure mercies,' `Compassions that fail not.' Where, then, is man's free will?  (queries Trapp) There is no such thing, believe it. Nature is wholly stony; it is God alone that `of these  stones raiseth up children unto Abraham.'" Lk. 3:8.  The imputation of the righteousness of Christ into the breast of His elect ­ even in the most disadvantageous of circumstances ­ is nowhere more gloriously displayed than in the drop-dead experience of PELATIAH son of Benaiah, a so-called "prince of the people." Ezek. 11:1. To wit: "Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the Lord's house, which looketh eastward; and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and PELATIAH the son of Benaiah, PRINCES OF THE PEOPLE. Then said he unto me, Son of man, THESE ARE THE MEN THAT DEVISE MISCHIEF, AND GIVE WICKED COUNSEL IN THIS CITY." (Ezek. 11:1,2)  Why not call this group of so-called "princes of the people" ­ (the movers and shakers of Jewish Captivity society) ­ I say, why not call them "The Ad Hoc Committee of 25" ­ for brevity? These 25 are further defined and described at some length in the 8th chapter of Ezekiel, where they are depicted as the lowest rung on the ladder of human decadence and depravity. For which the Lord has sworn their utter destruction in the strongest of terms; to wit: "Thus saith the Lord God; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel (!) for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence. He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine; thus will I accomplish my fury upon them. Then shall ye know that I am the Lord, when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savor to all their idols. And they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them." (Ezek. 6:10-13)  Beloved, the absolute and total imputation of the righteousness of Christ ­ which is the only hope of anyone's salvation ­ is best seen and expounded and understood upon the background of total depravity of the individual, and total apostasy, and total perversion, and total abomination of the filthy, overwhelming masses of society. And, Beloved, again: nowhere is this grim picture better painted by the Holy Ghost than in the 8th chapter of Ezekiel. It goes, progressively, from bad to infinitely worse. First, Ezekiel is brought "in the visions of God to Jerusalem," where he appears called to confront the wrath of a Jealous God about to be poured out upon an unfaithful spouse (Israel). "He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? (!)(!) even the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? But turn thee yet again, AND THOU SHALT SEE GREATER ABOMINATIONS." (Ezek. 8:6)  Then, Ezekiel was told to dig a hole in the wall, behind which was a door; to wit: "And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about. And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and  Sunday, May 16, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer  in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up." (Ezek. 8:9-11)  Beloved. The Holy Spirit drew that word picture ­ specifically for us, today, here. I submit, that a better word picture could not be drawn, to convey to the eyes of our understanding accurate notions and images of idolatry, moral filth, apostasy, decadence, total depravity, abominations, moral degeneracy, sodomy, bestiality, etc. All around the walls, 360-degrees, pornography on steroids. "Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken the earth. He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see GREATER ABOMINATIONS THAT THEY DO. Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord's house which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz. Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn thee yet again, and thou SHALT SEE GREATER ABOMINATIONS than these." (Ezek. 8:12-15)  Progressively worse and more of it; greater abominations than these; greater abominations than these; et al., greater abominations than these. And now we have come to the head of the abominable list; to wit: The Ad Hoc Committee of 25 (!): "And he brought me into the inner court of the Lord's house, and behold, at the door of the temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar, were ABOUT FIVE AND TWENTY MEN, with their backs toward the temple of the Lord," ­ (Gill: "These men, that they might imitate the Gentiles in their idolatry, turned their [stinking and mooning and flipping] backsides to the most holy place ­ the holy of holies ­ which is an aggravation of their impiety; casting the utmost contempt on God, his worship, and the place of it.") ­ "and their faces toward the east; and they worshiped the sun toward the east. Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen THIS, O son of man?" ­ (I.e., this final outrageous matter ­ involving The Ad Hoc Committee of 25 ­ appears to be the proverbial straw that broke the camel's back with God.) ­ "Is it a light thing to the house of Judah (America) that they commit the abominations which they commit here (in America)? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger; and, lo, THEY PUT THE BRANCH TO THEIR NOSE (!)(!).  Gill: "The Jewish commentators who rendered the word `branch' think an ill smell is meant; arising either from their posteriors, their back parts being towards the temple; or from the incense which they offered up to their idols." [Hence, in utmost insult and sacrilege The Ad Hoc Committee of 25 engaged in deliberately fouling the air of the temple and environs, and, blasphemously mooning and flipping-off God.] Beloved, it is not for us to second-guess the Almighty in any of His blessed prerogatives. Nor have I, for one, the least desire to do so.  Ezekiel was ordered to expose the "devices of mischief" and the "wicked counsel" of The Ad Hoc Committee of 25. In the all-wise God's estimation of things, the 25 rank at the very top of the scale of abominations ­ the very apex of evil. Yet, we do not know their names ­ except for Jaazaniah and PELATIAH. These 25 men wield more secret power than anyone else in society ­ call it, anonymous power. Or, rather, call it, "the power of the dog." Psa. 22:20. And, an even more accurate and appropriate name for this evil Satanic phenomenon would be, "the power of the sodomite," because, the dog, in Scripture, often refers to the sodomite, depending on the context; to wit: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the PRICE OF A DOG, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God." (Dt. 23:17,18)  Sunday, May 16, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Because dogs, like sodomites, are filthy, impudent, and libidinous (i.e., libidinous means, characterized  by or having inordinate lustful desires; lascivious. As a matter of fact, this pretty well describes dogs  and fags.) As to being impudent, this verse of Holy Scripture applies; to wit. "Were they ashamed  when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush;  therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down" ­  (i.e., cast suddenly into Hell ­ immediately and precipitously) ­ "saith the Lord." Jer. 6:15.  The disposition which the Lord God made of PELATIAH, and the circumstances under which he passed from this world into the Hell of the next world, testifies powerfully to the low regard the Lord held The Ad Hoc Committee of 25 in; to wit: "Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the Lord's house, which looketh eastward; and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaanaziah the son of Azur, and PELATIAH the son of Benaiah, princes of the people. Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city. ... Therefore" ­ (therefore what? how in the world does one fix such a mess? therefore what? you are going up against the most powerful forces in Satan's armory ­ anonymous, demon-possessed sons of belial all 25 therefore what? therefore PREACH! that's what [!] ­ come Hell or high water, as they say, PREACH [!] [Ezek. 11:1-4]). The prophet held a royal commission to preach; to wit: "And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel," ­ (here substitute America) ­ "to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me; they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day. For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them." Ezek. 2:3-5.  Armed with this Royal Commission from the Lord God Almighty, Ezekiel sallied forth to do battle against the true enemies of God and His Elect. He shortly came upon the five and twenty men at the top of Satan's list of his demon-possessed movers and shakers from Hell; to wit: The Ad Hoc Committee of 25. Whereupon, the Lord God of battle added a special addendum to Ezekiel's Commission; to wit: "Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city (Jerusalem); ... Therefore prophesy (PREACH !!!) AGAINST THEM, prophesy (PREACH !!!), O son of man !!! And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the Lord, ... Ye have feared the sword, and I will bring the sword upon you. ... And ye shall know that I am the Lord; for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done after the manners of the heathen that are round about you." (Ezek. 11:2-12)  Whereupon, ­ and right in the big middle of Ezekiel's Hell-fire-and-brimstone sermon ­ (BANG !!!) ­ the Lord God Almighty struck the big-shot leader of The Ad Hoc Committee of 25 ­ one PELATIAH the son of Benaiah ­ DEAD!!! ­ shades of Ananias and Sapphira (Acts 5:1-11). And, the aftermath of this dramatic incident involving the sudden death of PELATIAH was probably as it was with Ananias and Sapphira; to wit: "And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard these things." Acts 5:11. The Holy Ghost records the historical event as follows; to wit: "And it came to pass, when I prophesied," ­ (or, rather, `while I was PREACHING') ­ "that PELATIAH son of Benaiah died (or, rather, `suddenly dropped dead.')" Ezek. 11:13.  Just think, Beloved, how refreshing this timely Earth Judgment (OK, GodSmack) must have been to the persecuted Ezekiel, dwelling (metaphorically) with scorpions. Ezek. 2:6. Shall not God avenge His Elect?  I love you. Amen.  
