Sunday, September 12, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. IN THAT DAY the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea." Isa. 26:19-21; 27:1.  This passage is from a beautiful "Song of Isaiah" which comprises most of chapters 26 and 27 of Isaiah. It is prophetical of the last of the last days, and is designed to comfort God's Elect as to their  circumstances during the tumultuous punishments of all the wicked; to wit: What shall be the provisions made for the Elect's retreat and safety, and where they might be secure during all the storms of God's  wrath upon the wicked? In which the Lord addresses his people in a very kind and tender manner,  claiming an interest in them, and expressing great affection for them, and concern for their welfare: MY  people, says He, whom I have loved with an everlasting love, chosen to be a special people above all  people, made a covenant with them in my Son, and redeemed them by His blood, and called them by  my spirit and grace. The worldwide condition of affairs at the time the Elect find themselves in great  need of asylum and security is described in Isa. 34; to wit:  "Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people; let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies; he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood. And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven; behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams; for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. ...For it is the DAY OF THE LORD'S VENGEANCE, and the YEAR OF RECOMPENCES FOR THE CONTROVERSY OF ZION." (Isa. 34:1-8)  The other day I gave an hour of my time to each of two news-gathering agencies; to wit: USA Today (one hour) and The Huffington Post (one hour). I tell you, Beloved, I will soon be 81 years old, the good Lord willing, and Mom will even sooner be 85 years old, the Lord willing, and I find that our remaining hours are growing more and more precious, while we anxiously and hopefully look up with expectation that our dear Lord will soon return. That time will be the time of the restitution of all things, the day of the LORD'S VENGEANCE, and the year of RECOMPENCES FOR THE CONTROVERSY OF ZION, and many other delightfully descriptive names for the Second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory. The reporters from USA Today and the Huffington Post were interested in the end of the world, and, really, all mankind seems to be awakening to the distant sounds of the last silver trumpet blast, but few have their senses exercised to accurately discern the Signs of the Times. Heb. 5:14 and Mat. 16:3.  Sunday, September 12, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  It has been about a year (7/14/09) since the New York Times wrote a lengthy piece about the ancient Euphrates River drying up. Has the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates causing the water thereof to dry up, "that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared?" Rev. 16:12. The New York Times piece was and is quite persuasive; to wit: "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried, THAT THE WAY OF THE KINGS OF THE EAST MIGHT BE PREPARED. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon." (Rev. 16:12-16)  Thus you see, Beloved, that the run-up to the final and most horrific human blood-letting known to man in all of history ­ the BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON ­ I say, that the final run-up to that great battle will be the drying up of the waters of the Euphrates river. And so, it is a mighty interesting piece of news to us, when we are told on good authority that THAT DRYING OUT PROCESS HAS ALREADY BEGUN. Beloved. Has the sixth angel already emptied his vial upon the great river Euphrates? Has the drying out process begun? Are the kings of the east (China, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Russia, etc.) ­ I say, have preparations already begun for these millions of crack oriental troops (Chinese, et al.) to march, Westward Ho!? Are the unclean spirits like croaking frogs well on their unholy, propagandizing crusades to the "whole world?" With Hillary Clinton taking the lead as Secretary of State of the United States of America? As alter ego of Barack Obama, as President of the world's only remaining super power? Here is The New York Times report, submitted as describing the final run-up to the Battle of Armageddon; to wit:  "Jubaish, Iraq. Iraq Suffers as the Euphrates River Dwindles. Throughout the marshes, the reed gatherers, standing on land they once floated over, cry out to visitors in a passing boat. ,,Maaku mai! they shout, holding up their rusty sickles. ,,There is no water! The Euphrates is drying up. Strangled by the water policies of Iraqs neighbors, Turkey and Syria; a two-year drought; and years of misuse by Iraq and its farmers, the river is significantly smaller than it was just a few years ago. Some officials worry that it could soon be half of what it is now. (The following paragraph is most remarkable, demonstrating that all mankind somehow knows that the drying up of the Euphrates is a sign of the end of the world.) The shrinking of the Euphrates, a river so crucial to the birth of civilization that the Book of Revelation prophesied its drying up as a sign of the end times, has decimated farms along its banks, has left fishermen impoverished and has depleted riverside towns as farmers flee to the cities looking for work. The poor suffer more acutely, but all strata of society are feeling the effects: sheiks, diplomats, and even members of Parliament who retreat to their farms after weeks in Baghdad. Along the river, rice and wheat fields have turned to BAKED DIRT. Canals have dwindled to shallow streams, and fishing boats sit on dry land. Pumps meant to feed water treatment plants dangle pointlessly over brown puddles. The old men say its the worst they remember, sitting in a riverside café full of idle colleagues. The drought is widespread in Iraq. The area sown with wheat and barley in the rain-fed north is down 95 percent from the usual, and the date palm and citrus orchards of the east are parched. For two years rainfall has been far below normal, leaving the reservoirs dry. IT IS A CRISIS THAT THREATENS THE ROOTS OF IRAQS IDENTITY, NOT ONLY AS THE LAND  Sunday, September 12, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  BETWEEN TWO RIVERS, BUT AS A NATION THAT WAS ONCE THE LARGEST  EXPORTER OF DATES IN THE WORLD, AND THAT ONCE SUPPLIED GERMAN  BEER WITH BARLEY. Now Iraq is importing more and more grain, farmers along the Euphrates say, with anger and despair. In a recent conference in Baghdad ­ where participants drank bottled water from Saudi Arabia, a country with a fraction of Iraqs fresh water ­ officials spoke of disaster. ,,We have a real thirst in Iraq, said Ali Baban, the minister for planning. ,,OUR AGRICULTURE IS GOING TO DIE, OUR CITIES ARE GOING TO WILT, AND NO NATION CAN KEEP QUIET IN SUCH A SITUATION. ,,There used to be water everywhere, said Abduredha Joda, sitting in his reed hut on a  dry, rocky plot of land outside Karbala. Mr. Joda, who describes his dire circumstances with a tired smile. ,,This year its just a desert, he said. On a scorching morning in  Diwaniya, Bashia Mohammed, 60, was working in a drainage pool by the highway; but the dead farm was not the real crisis. ,,Theres no water in the river that we drink from,  she said, referring to a channel that flows from the Euphrates. ,,Its now totally dry, and it  contains sewage water, and we have to drink from the river. All my kids are sick because of the water. In the southeast, where the Euphrates nears the end of its 1,730-mile  journey, emptying into the Persian Gulf, the situation is grave. Sheep graze on land in the middle of the river. ,,Next winter will be the final chance, said Hashem Hilead Shehi, a 73-year-old farmer who lives in a bone-dry village west of the marshes. ,,IF WE ARE NOT ABLE TO PLANT, THEN ALL OF THE FAMILIES WILL LEAVE."  Beloved, in light of the grievous situation on the ground TODAY, IN IRAQ, ought we not NOW consider the question: Has the sixth angel (Rev. 16:12) already poured out his vial of the wrath of God upon the great river Euphrates? Recall the solemn commission given these holy and powerful creatures; to wit: "And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; FOR IN THEM IS FILLED UP THE WRATH OF GOD." (Rev. 15:1) "And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth." (Rev. 16:1) "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared." (Rev. 16:12)  The purpose of drying up the Euphrates River was figuratively and literally to destroy the military capability of the nations of the world. There is also the suggestion that at the end of time ­ the last of the last days ­ the world's balance of military power will have shifted. "My determination," says the Lord, "is to gather the armies of the nations into the Valley of Megiddo, and there to destroy them with the greatest of all killing enterprises and deadly slaughter-machines;" to wit: "Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for MY DETERMINATION IS TO GATHER THE NATIONS, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. For then will I turn to the people (God's Elect) a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent." (Zeph. 3:8,9)  The United States of america is of very little consequence by then. Therefore no extraordinary effort need be made to assure any of the americas' presence at the Battle of Armageddon. america no longer has an army or military establishment worthy of the name. america has sinned away her day of grace, and now presents as a toothless tiger with claws clipped.  Sunday, September 12, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  We may learn much about the famous prophesied Battle of Armageddon from those things that are clearly revealed in Scripture. The blood of the slain, allowing 5.5 quarts per dead soldier will accommodate 3.6 billion dead soldiers in the Valley of Megiddo. Ben did the computation, using the following statistics to find the volume of the elongated, oval-shaped bowl: six feet deep (blood is said to be as deep as the horses' bridle is high - Rev. 14:20), 160 furlongs long and 80 furlongs wide.  It was there that many ancient battles were fought, including the famous battle wherein Pharaoh-Necho killed good king Josiah; to wit: "Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? In his days Pharaoh-Necho king of Egypt went up against Assyria to the river Euphrates; and king Josiah went against him; and he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him. And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre." (2 Kgs. 23:28-30)  Now, Beloved, keep the huge elongated bowl in mind as we look at other passages bidding fair to fill up that bowl with freshly-spilled human blood from BILLIONS of soldiers lately arrived from China, India, and other kings and their armies from the east, thanks to a now-dry-as-a-bone Euphrates river. Now read in a new light such passages as Isa. 34; to wit: "Come near, ye nations, to hear, and hearken, ye people; let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. FOR THE INDIGNATION OF THE LORD IS UPON ALL NATIONS, AND HIS FURY UPON ALL THEIR ARMIES; he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood." (Isa. 34:1-3)  Beloved, look at it. Is it not a huge sea of blood? Freshly-killed human blood! Now the scene shifts to the tender-hearted Jesus; except that the same Jesus is now "clothed with a vesture dipped in blood," the blood of His enemies which He has shed in wrathful vengeance for their many crimes against Him and His people on earth. Rev. 19:13. Look closer, Beloved, and rejoice ­ with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 1 Pet. 1:8. "And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." (Rev. 19:14-16)  And the scene shifts back to the veritable sea of freshly-spilled human blood. Which, if you behold aright ­ you will never forget. Ben's figure estimated 3.6 BILLION dead soldiers, at 5.5 quarts of blood apiece. Listen, and tremble. "And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God; that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great. ... And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth; AND ALL THE FOWLS WERE FILLED WITH THEIR FLESH." (Rev. 19:17-21)  I love you. Amen.  
