Sunday, November 18, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper."  "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." (Isa. 54:17) That profound and comforting Oracle seems to begin with these words; to wit: "For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee." Isa. 54:10.  I say, these words are profound and comforting, and they touch the mainspring of all practical religion. They state the 5th of the Five Points of Calvinism; to wit: The Perseverance of the Saints: "For I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day." 2 Tim. 1:12.  Gill says of these words in Isaiah: "The love of God to his people is an everlasting love; it always continues; it never did, nor ever will depart, notwithstanding their fall in Adam, their depraved state by nature, their actual sins and transgressions, their many revoltings and backslidings; whatever departs from them, His kindness shall not; though riches may flee away from them, friends stand aloof from them, health may be taken away, and life itself, yet the love of God is always the same; and so, whatever providences may attend His church and interest in any period of time, He has the same paternal care for it, and kindness for His people, as ever."  Back to the Oracle: "Neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee." Isa. 54:10(b). This is the great Covenant of Grace made with Christ and His people from everlasting, even in the Council Halls of Eternity ­ the Father, Son and Holy Ghost being the holy Signatories thereto; to wit: "The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them. Israel then shall dwell in safety alone..." Deut. 33:27, 28. This covenant is ordered in all things and sure, according to David; to wit: "Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow." 2 Sam. 23:5.  And this blessed doctrine cheered the spirits of the prophet Isaiah, when he was often afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted; to wit: "O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires." Isa. 54:11. These precious stones describe the priceless spiritual house ­ of infinite intrinsic value ­ which is the church, composed of precious stones. The foundation of black marble and sapphires ­ upon which a building of glorious and fair colors stands ­ may denote that spiritual house of lively or living stones ­ beautiful with the gifts and graces of God; to wit: "And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." Isa. 54:12,13.  Sunday, November 18, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  BEAUTIFUL, FUNCTIONAL, AND MYSTERIOUS  A description of the church; beautiful, functional, and mysterious; supplemented and fleshed out in the New Testament metaphor; to wit: "Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 1 Pet. 2:5. And all this was wrought out in eternity, to come to pass in time, in infinite detail; to wit: "The Lord hath appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn thee." Jer. 31:3. Beloved, knowledge and understanding of these glorious things is supernatural. Such are the weapons of our spiritual warfare ­ which are mighty to the pulling down of Satan's strongholds. "Casting down imaginations (or, reasonings), and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." (2 Cor. 10:4,5).  Though the disciples had been with Jesus some three and a half years, it was not until He opened the eyes of their understanding ­ POST-resurrection ­ that they had any real understanding; to-wit: "And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. THEN OPENED HE THEIR UNDERSTANDING, THAT THEY MIGHT UNDERSTAND THE SCRIPTURES." Lk. 24:44, 45.  I repeat, to emphasize the importance: these supernatural understandings are the spiritual weapons of our warfare that are mighty through God to the pulling down of Satan's strongholds. 2 Cor. 10:4. "And we know that WE are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given US an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life." 1 Jn. 5:19,20.  NOW, back to the Oracle: "In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee." Isa. 54:14.  Gill has this to say about this passage; to wit: "`Thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear; and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.' So far from it, that thou shalt not be in the least afraid of it, neither from within nor from without; not from false teachers that oppress the mind with false doctrine; nor from persecutors that oppress and injure in person and property: the church will be now free from the oppression and tyranny of mystical Babylon, which is now set to fall, on whom God's wrath will be poured, and so the church will be no more in fear of them. This is all included in the mystery of godliness, `Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints.' Col. 1:26. `To whom ­ that is, to His saints ­ God would make known what is the riches of THE GLORY OF THIS MYSTERY among the Gentiles; which is CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY.' Col. 1:27."  Sunday, November 18, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  FOR THY SAKE, THEY SHALL FALL  Again, back to the Oracle, which is speaking to the End Times ­ the Last Days of All ­ and to All Times, secondarily; to wit: "Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake." Isa. 54:15. "FOR THY SAKE," ­ as Gill says, "`for thy sake, they shall fall; because of the love that I bear to thee, they shall not succeed, or do thee any hurt, but shall perish,' these are also the unclean spirits like frogs ­ (Rev. 16:13, hopping and croaking their way out of this world's slime and Satan's ooze), ­ the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience (Col. 3:6), that shall take the form of the beast and the false prophet (Rev. 13), and the great red dragon of Rev. 12, and Satan himself as upon entering into Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon." ­ ("Jesus answered, He it is [who shall betray me], to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. And after the sop, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest do quickly," {Jn. 13:26,27}).  And, those diabolical fools who dare gather together against us, are further identified at Psa. 2:1; to wit: "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us." Psa. 2:1-3. But, meanwhile, we are given the glorious privilege of seeing & understanding the conduct, activity and attitude of Heaven ­ even as these idiots gather and take counsel together and plot and scheme against the Lord and against His anointed; to wit: "He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision (mockery, taunting). Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. Yet have I set MY king upon my holy hill of Zion. I will declare the decree (i.e., I ­ not the kings and their leaders and the rabble mob -- will give the orders that stick, about the bands and cords, THROUGH MY CHURCH AND PEOPLE)." Psa. 2:4-7.  Here, Beloved, is a message for the kings and judges of the earth. The Lord God Almighty has given the heathen and the uttermost parts of the earth for the inheritance of ­ and to be put in active, actual, present possession of ­ our Lord Jesus Christ. Present Possession. To wit: "And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, ALL power IS given unto me (present tense) in heaven and in earth. Go ye THEREFORE, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe ALL THINGS whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen." Mat. 28:18-20.  Notice here, Beloved, that the absolute and the total power or sovereignty of our Lord Jesus Christ is tied only and completely to the preaching of the Gospel. To the activity of teaching all nations of peoples ­ and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. There are no more important words than these words. Mark puts the Great Commission in slightly different words ­ or, better said, Mark uses complementary words; to wit: "And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." Mk. 16:15. All the world. All mankind. Teaching them to observe ALL THINGS whatsoever I have commanded you.  Sunday, November 18, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  HIS COMMANDMENTS ARE NOT GRIEVOUS  See how important all these words are. Listen to these words out of First John; to wit: "By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments. For this is the love of God, that we KEEP HIS COMMANDMENTS: and HIS COMMANDMENTS ARE NOT GRIEVOUS." 1 Jn. 5:2,3. Our Lord Jesus Christ personalized this concept ­ forever ­ in a compound, redundant, and unforgettable way; to wit: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him."  And again, two verses later: "Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. (And, immediately, negatively put:) He that loveth me NOT keepeth NOT my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me." Jn. 14:21, 23, 24.  Therefore, and in light of the absolute sovereignty of Jesus Christ the Son of God and God the Son and the King of Zion (the Head of the Church) ­ the Church has some advice for the kings and judges of the earth; to wit: "Thou (the Lord Jesus) shalt break them (the heathen and the people, the kings and the rulers, see Psa. 2:1-2) with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. BE WISE NOW THEREFORE, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. (From the highest executive officers to the lowliest judicial officers ­ i.e., from the President to the Chief Justice of the United States ­ you have the duty to discharge your function as a servant of the Lord, in the solemn fear of the Lord, and that means in the fear of the Lord to the point of trembling, and to the point of getting on your knees and kissing the feet of the Lord Jesus Christ, in conscious and deliberate and lowly PUBLIC acknowledgment of the fact that if His wrath is kindled the tiniest little bit, He can with one wave of His hand banish immediately to Hell every last one of this generation alive on the earth ­ and of all generations of human beings that ever lived)." Psa. 2:9-12.  AND NOW, TO THE CONCLUSION OF THIS ORACLE; to wit: "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." (Isa. 54:17)  This passage of Scripture almost expounds itself; and this Oracle (Isa. 54:10-17) should be studied together with Psa. 2. Both deal with Satanic conspiracies.  The kings and the rulers; the people and the heathen; call the roster of the population of the whole earth; they're all gathering together in meetings of every kind; all to do one thing; to wit: to condemn God and His anointed (His Elect); all because of the words coming from the mouths of God's Elect. They cannot remain silent.  Sunday, November 18, 2007 pg.5  Sermon Outline  AN OFFENDER FOR A WORD  "We, having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak." (2 Corinthians 4:13)  "And when the tempter (Satan) came to him (Christ), he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by EVERY WORD that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Mat. 4:3,4)  "Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart; for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts." (Jer. 15:16)  "For since I spake...the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay." (Jer. 20:8,9)  "But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy WORDS thou shalt be justified, and by thy WORDS thou shalt be condemned." (Mat. 12:36, 37) WE'VE COME FULL CIRCLE. The title of the sermon, you remember, is, "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and EVERY TONGUE THAT SHALL RISE AGAINST THEE in judgment thou shalt condemn." Isa. 54:17. They brought us into judgment in their courts and punished us for our good WORDS ­ by using THEIR perverted, lying WORDS ­ and thereby "making a man an offender for a WORD." Isa. 24:21.  On the Lord's Great Judgment Day, those same good WORDS of ours will acquit us; and those same PERVERTED, LYING WORDS of theirs will damn them.  "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds...and of all their hard speeches (WORDS) which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers (WORDS spoken against God and His sovereignty and His people, for their WORDS of WARNING), walking after their own lusts; and their MOUTH SPEAKETH great swelling WORDS...But, beloved, remember ye the WORDS which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ...Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy. To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen." (Jude 14-17,24-25) Amen.  
