Sunday, October 19, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which  commit such things are worthy of death, not only do  the same, but have pleasure in them that do them."  Rom. 1:32.  David Brown (1803-1897), Professor of Theology, of Aberdeen, Scotland, said he had to be very, very careful in expounding those passages of Scripture in Romans, chapter 1, dealing with male and female sodomites and their nasty sex practices and their filthy, lawless lives generally ­ lest he transgress ("trench upon," he put it) the Lord's prohibitions against filthy talk. Dr. Brown was called "Principal Brown" because for the last 40 years of his long life (94 years!) he was Principal of the famous Free Church College of Aberdeen, Scotland, from whence he wrote many well-respected expository works of sacred Writ. Brown said, e.g., in expounding Rom. 1:26: "`For even their women' ­ that sex ­ i.e., women ­ whose priceless jewel and fairest ornament is modesty, and which, when that is once lost, not only becomes more shameless than the other sex, but lives henceforth only to drag the other sex down to its level. The (sodomite) practices here referred to, though too abundantly attested by classic authors, cannot be further illustrated, without trenching on things which `ought not to be named among us as becometh saints.' Eph. 5:3."  Joe Scarborough, on his TV talk show last Tuesday, said that the Obama supporters, in Obama's race for president, have been saying and publishing such vile and filthy things about Gov. Sarah Palin, in her race for vice-president, that he could not repeat them on the air. Well now Beloved. I'll warrant you that Joe Scarborough ­ (he calls his TV show, "Morning, Joe") ­ I say, I'll warrant you that ol' Joe never saw vile and filthy words, compared to the thousands of e-mails we get from fags and their enablers every day. But we are not surprised, because our Lord Jesus Christ has sent us the Holy Spirit ­ the Author of all Scripture ­ to guide us into all truth (Jn. 16:13) ­ and He has given us Romans, chapter 1, with a long series of words and phrases, which are descriptive examples, to set forth the evil principles, feelings, and practices which reign in the world of the sodomites. A veritable word-picture of the loathsome, despicable and abominable kingdom of the sodomite beasts and their enablers.  Beloved, our dear Lord Jesus would not leave us in ignorance about this matter, with our heads spinning at the proliferation of these stinking, feces-eating animals all around us ­ and getting worse with each passing day. We need to diligently study Romans, chapter 1, until we are the world's foremost experts on the subject. I say, study, study, study. Romans, chapter 1. Look again at our text, which is verse #32, which is the last verse of Romans, chapter 1. Beloved, I urge you, ring the bells, as they say, blow the whistles, and sound the trumpets on Romans 1:32. Let me give it to you as Dr. Brown expounded it. The old Scotsman from Aberdeen.  Sunday, October 19, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Living in a day and in a land where fags and dykes were few and far between ­ so far as anybody could tell. They certainly were not under every rock and behind every tree ­ like it is today. They certainly were not running a candidate for president and one for vicepresident of the United States ­ and already controlling Congress. Look at openly-gay, militantly gay, Barney Suck-lips Frank, sitting as chairman of the banking committee in the House of Representatives, in de facto charge of all the banks, and all the mortgage banks, and the stock market ­ we're talking trillions here ­ directly or indirectly impacting every business, every mortgage, and every citizen of the United States, and the world. With his fag butt-buddy Herb Moses positioned at Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac to influence control of those trillions. Beloved, is there any longer any doubt that fags run America? Get used to the face of the fag ­ Barney Frank. Get used to his fag voice. He has a fag lisp to his voice. He can't help it. You know where his lips have been, and what his lips have been doing ­ with the likes of Butt-Buddy Herb Moses.  "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul ! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked ! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him." (Isa. 3:9-11)  Now back to Romans, chapter 1:32, as expounded by Brown; to wit:  "Who knowing (i.e., knowing well) the (righteous) judgment of God, ­ (i.e., the stern law of Divine Retribution, to which every man's conscience bears witness), ­ that they which commit such things are worthy of death. (The word "death" is here used in its widest known sense ­ namely, the uttermost of Divine vengeance against sin.) Not only do the same (i.e., participate in filthy fag sex sins, which, under the pressure of temptation and in the heat of passion, they might do, even while abhorring it, and abhorring themselves for doing it), but have pleasure in (or, `consent to') them that do them. (The word conveys the idea of positive satisfaction in a person or thing, Acts 8:1; to wit: "And Saul was consenting unto his death.") The charge here brought against the heathen world is, that they DELIBERATELY SET THEIR SEAL to such actions (i.e., filthy, abominable and lawless fag sex acts) BY ENCOURAGING AND APPLAUDING THE DOING OF THEM IN OTHERS. This is the climax of our apostle's charges against the heathen (i.e., fags and fag-enablers); and, certainly, if the things are in themselves as black as possible, (and, Beloved, they certainly are ­ just look around you and read the signs of the times, Mat. 16:3), this SETTLED AND UNBLUSHING SATISFACTION AT THE PRACTICE OF THEM, apart from all the blinding effects of present passion, MUST BE REGARDED AS THE DARKEST FEATURE OF HUMAN DEPRAVITY."  Sunday, October 19, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  Beloved, through the years, how often have we said that a fag-enabler is a greater sinner than a fag; and that fag-enabling is the bottom rung on the ladder of human depravity? It is gratifying ­ at this late stage of our heavenly journey ­ to come upon a widely-respected and accepted expositor, who looked down the corridors of time, and accurately prophesied about the filthiness and lawlessness (2 Pet. 2:7,8) of the fags in our day ­ with no experience, SUCH AS WE HAVE, to guide him. He, as it were, prognosticated (or, foretold) our day; and we, as it were, ratify his prognostication (or, prophesy). How else beside "the Spirit of Christ which was in him could he testify these things beforehand?" 1 Pet. 1:11. "Long before this 1st Chapter of Romans was penned," says Bro. Brown, "the Lesbians and others throughout refined Greece had been luxuriating in such debasements; and as for the Romans, Tacitus, speaking of the emperor Tiberius, tells us that NEW WORDS (filthy words) had then to be coined to express the newly-invented sexual stimulants to jaded (or, worn out) passion. No wonder that, thus sick and dying as was this poor humanity of ours under the highest earthly cultures (i.e., ancient Greek and Roman cultures)." And, no wonder that the filthy, fag-infested humanity of our own day is sick and dying, ­ living out the last days of the last days.  When the apostle Paul took up pen to write the greatest theological treatise ever written; to wit: The Book of Romans ­ he almost immediately felt compelled to deal ­ THOROUGHLY & AUTHORITATIVELY & DISPOSITIVELY ­ with the matter of sodomy and sodomites (or, fags & fag-enablers). Rom. 1:14-32. Paul began by declaring that he was ready, willing and able to preach the Gospel ­ not only to Rome, where the seat of Satan was (Gill), and where the heat of persecution was then raging against all Christians ­ but to all mankind. Because, said he:  "I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also." (Rom. 1:14,15)  Beloved. Please pay close attention to these precious Words, as dictated by the Holy Spirit; to wit: "I am debtor to all mankind. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach to all mankind." Then, added to these holy words, are these, also dictated by the Holy Spirit for us to read and embrace; to wit:  "For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for NECESSITY is laid upon me; yea, WOE IS UNTO ME, IF I PREACH NOT THE GOSPEL ! " (1 Cor. 9:16)  Beloved, whether these people ­ among whom we dwell, and to whom we preach the Gospel from one end of this nation to the other ­ indeed, around the whole stinking fag-cursed world ­ I say, whether they know it or not, we owe them a huge debt, WHICH CAN ONLY BE PAID by our faithfully preaching the Gospel to them! Think of the blessed ramifications of that Bible doctrine! Just think! And then add the following sad, yet triumphant and precious words which the Holy Ghost sent directly to Westboro Baptist Church; to wit:  Sunday, October 19, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "And now, behold, I know that ye all, AMONG WHOM I HAVE GONE PREACHING THE KINGDOM OF GOD, shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you ALL THE COUNSEL OF GOD." (Acts 20:25-27) (Parenthetically, we are to preach ALL THE COUNSEL OF GOD, ­ and not the simplistic mantra of all the heretical, Arminian Billy Graham-ites who contend that the Gospel is merely the repeated recitation of what amounts to the Protestant Rosary; to wit: the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. These are the same theological cockroaches ­ get it? they love to live in the dark, and scatter like a herd of cats when the light turns on ­ I say, the same theological cockroaches who parrot the twin lies that God loves everybody, and that man has a free will that can always knock God's determinate Will, Counsel and Foreknowledge clean out of the ball park. Reciting the Protestant Rosary over and over again in a manifold of different ways, IS NOT PREACHING THE GOSPEL, you big dummy!)  Now, Beloved, let us add these wonderful, Holy Ghost-dictated Words that we are indebted to all mankind to preach to them WHETHER THEY LIKE IT OR NOT ! ­ (the Lord Jesus has not solemnly commissioned us to preach the Gospel to every creature ­ but only if these spiritually deaf, dumb and blind idiots want us to) ­ I say, let us add these wonderful Words, that will further establish the doctrine I am expounding; to wit:  "And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house, Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." (Acts 20:20,21)  Furthermore, Paul was condemned and sentenced to die ­ (some say, by Nero, the lunatic Roman tyrant) ­ at the time that the Holy Spirit again chose him, through whom to dictate a message to us at Westboro Baptist Church; to wit:  "For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." (2 Tim. 4:6,7)  Under such conditions, ordinarily, the apostle's words would naturally take on a special pathos, (i.e., tenderness or sorrow), and urgency. And, to be sure, none of those emotions are missing with us. Nor should they be. Nevertheless, there is an overriding consideration with us. UNTIL WE DIE, we have a debt to pay; ergo, we have some Gospel preaching to do. That is foremost with us. See how Paul's last epistle begins; to wit:  Sunday, October 19, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; PREACH THE WORD; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine." (2 Tim. 4:1,2)  Amazing. And then the apostle ­ operating in the Holy Ghost as His AMANUENSIS (i.e., a kind of super-efficient recording secretary) assigns what might be called a specific, detailed, prophetical reason for the URGENCY, which would certainly appear to be more applicable if addressed to those few of God's Elect whose honor it is to be chosen to function in a doomed world in the last of the last days; to wit:  "FOR THE TIME WILL COME when they will not endure sound doctrine;" ­ (e.g., the sodomite-related doctrine articulated in Romans, Chapter One, at the outset of the apostle's DEFINITIVE treatise on the Gospel); ­ "but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." (2 Tim. 4:3,4)  Thereupon the condemned and soon-to-be-executed apostle, acting as the agent of the Holy Ghost, gives unto the bold yet humble and longsuffering members of Westboro Baptist Church a heaven-inspired, four-section plan of action for these perilous times; to wit:  "But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry." (2 Tim. 4:5)  Splendid. Each member should study this Holy Plan, with a view toward helping himself and his fellow saints discharge all debts owing to all mankind to preach the Gospel to every creature ­ all as we have shown the true meanings of those Words and Phrases to be. For example, the elliptical 2nd Timothy 4:2 expression, "Preach the word," means EXPOUND ROMANS 1:14-32 about fags and fag-enablers, reaching an exegetical crescendo (i.e., critical interpretation, explanation or analysis) at Rom. 1:32.  The rationale is as follows; to wit: In the last of the last days, sodomites will wildly proliferate and dominate mankind, as in the days of Sodom. Lk. 17:28. We are required to watch in all things, and diligently discern the signs of the times, and rightly divide the word of truth, so as to accurately apply the proper Scriptures to the situation on the ground. Mat. 16:3; 2nd Tim. 2:15; Rom. 1:14-32. Ergo, we must be experts on Rom. 1:14-32. We must help each other become experts on Rom. 1:14-32. A word-picture of fags and fag-enablers is painted by Rom. 1:14-32 that is indispensable to a full and accurate understanding of this dominate issue in the last of the last days. Each word counts ­ BIG TIME !  Sunday, October 19, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  Paul begins by saying that he is a debtor to preach the Gospel, that he is ready, willing and able to pay his debt by preaching the Gospel to all mankind, that he is not ashamed of the Gospel, and that the Gospel includes the wrath of God, which is revealed from heaven against the reprobates BECAUSE THEIR MISSION IN LIFE IS TO SNUFF OUT THE TRUTH OF GOD IN THE EARTH; ­ i.e., the truth of God about fags and fag-enablers, ­ who are thereupon identified to us, and to all the world, as being idol-worshiping fag fools whom God has given up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, TO DISHONOR THEIR OWN BODIES BETWEEN THEMSELVES, and whose women God has given up to vile affections, changing the natural use of their bodies into that which is against nature, and whose men God has given up to leave the natural use of the woman, and to burn in their lust one toward another, men with men, working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves, that recompense of their error which they deserved ­ alluding to the many physical and moral ways in which, UNDER THE RIGHTEOUS GOVERNMENT OF GOD, THE SIN OF SODOMY WAS MADE SELF-AVENGING.  Beloved, do you begin to get the impression that these so-called gay people ­ and their enablers ­ are, in God's estimation, nothing but vile, filthy animals? I mean, this is heavy stuff ­ EVERY LAST ONE OF THEM ! And the Holy Ghost cuts them no slack ! Listen; to wit: "They are FILLED WITH ALL UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, FORNICATION, WICKEDNESS, (etc., and there follow some 20 additional Words and Phrases, all dictated by the Holy Ghost, identifying these fags and their enablers as they truly are)." Rom. 1:2931.  "Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." (Romans 1:29-32)  Beloved. These are the natural brute beasts who now control our government, schools, media, entertainment industry, and churches ­ and indeed, every segment of society. It is our duty, in these perilous times, to know and preach the truth about these animals; to wit:  "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come." (2 Tim. 3:1)  Our text is how the Holy Ghost closed his sermon; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." Rom. 1:32. "Preach the Word." 2 Tim. 4:2(a). Amen.  
