Dearly Beloved of the Lord, I am happy to be given the opportunity to speak to you today. Preliminarily I want to tell you that our fellow-labourers have been given the privilege of appearing as ambassadors of Christ on the scene, as a great mercy from the Maker of all things seen and unseen, to the following persons alive on the earth with us, to testify of our Lord Jesus Christ and the things pertaining to him: FLOTUS Anti-Christ Michelle Obama and one hundred thousand of her sycophantic rabble at the Expocentre and environs in Topeka, Kansas; thousands upon thousands of college graduates and their families--Our Lord and John Baptist call them generation of vipers (Matthew 3:7, 12:24, and 23:33)--in Ft. Collins, Colorado, Hays, Kansas, Emporia, Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, Manhattan, Kansas, and Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas; and a larger number of High School Graduates and their families in Kansas at Emporia, Silver Lake, Junction City, Eudora, Lawrence, and 7 Topeka High Schools; and these unforgettable experiences just in the last 48 hours; with blessedly simple messages: Be ye reconciled to Christ (2 Corinthians 5:20) and Repent or Perish (Luke 13:1-3). "The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them." (Matthew 11:5). "For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe." (1 Corinthian 1:21) And all of that in addition to the 30+ weekly picket locations in and around Topeka and the many out of town. And by the grace and mercy of God we ain't no ways tired. "For though [we] preach the gospel, [we] have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon [us]; yea, woe is unto [us], if [we] preach not the gospel!" (1 Corinthians 9:16). Those that are listening read the written sermon; it contains voluminous Bible references that I will not read aloud today. Look them up and study them, please. "And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people, This day is holy unto the LORD your God; mourn not, nor weep. For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law. Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto our Lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the LORD is your strength. So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved. And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 1  mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared unto them." (Nehemiah 8:9-12).  "When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will joy in the God of my salvation. The LORD God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds' feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my stringed instruments." (Habakkuk 3:16-19) In the worst of times, when all creature mercies failed, Habakkuk did and resolved to rejoice in the Lord.  "For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another." (Galatians 5:13-26).  The subject today is joy. Dictionary.com defines the word:  As a noun, it is  1. the emotion of great delight or happiness caused by something exceptionally good or satisfying; keen pleasure; elation.  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 2  2. a source or cause of keen pleasure or delight; something or someone greatly valued or appreciated. 3. the expression or display of glad feeling; festive gaiety. 4. a state of happiness or felicity. As a verb (used without object) 5. to feel joy; be glad; rejoice.  The Joy I will speak of today--THE ONLY JOY THAT REALLY MATTERS-- is one of the traits going to make up the character of, and is peculiar to God's elect; those believers and followers of our Lord Jesus Christ rendered ready, willing and able in the day of His power (Psalm 110:3). The efficient cause of this joy is God; he who is the object is the author of it; God, Father, Son, and Spirit; and which is therefore called, "The joy of the Lord," in Nehemiah 8:10, and in Nehemiah 12:43 it reads: "for God had made them rejoice with great joy." "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing [in our Lord Jesus Christ], that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost." (Romans 15:13) "These things have I spoken unto you," says our Lord, "that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full." (John 15:11). It is the Lord that "appoint[s] unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that he might be glorified". (Isaiah 61:3). And the Spirit of God is concerned in it; it is one of the fruits of the Spirit, and is ranked with the first of them in Galatians 5:22; and in Romans 14:17 it describes this joy as the product of the Spirit: "For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." The instruments or means of it are, the ministers of the gospel, through the ministration of the word. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" Isaiah 52:7. They do not pretend to have "dominion over the faith" of believers, but to be "helpers of their joy." (2 Corinthians 1:24).  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 3  What are the objects of this supernaturally implanted Joy?  Not a creature, nor creature enjoyment, nor outward privilege, nor duty; but Jehovah himself, the Lord and God of all; therefore David said: "Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God my God." (Psalm 43:4). To glory in riches, wisdom, and strength, and to boast of them, is not right; and to rejoice in such boastings, is called "evil" by James: "Go to now, ye that say, To day or tomorrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain: Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. For what is your life? It is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that. But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil." (James 4:13-16). To rejoice in anything of this kind, is to rejoice in a thing of nought, and in what is of no account--it is not part of what is considered in the calculation. "Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?" Amos 6:13. To rejoice in youthful pleasures and vanities, and indulge to them in the highest degree; such joy is not spiritual, or the fruit of the Spirit; but is carnal and sensual, and but for a season; and to glory, and boast of, and trust in fleshly descent, in privileges of birth, and in the duties of religion, and in a man's own righteousness, and please himself with such things, is only the joy of an unregenerate man, and of an hypocrite, which is but for a moment. (Ecclesiastes 11:9, 12:1; Hebrews 9:10; Luke 3:8; Job 20:5).  But the Lord himself is the proper object of joy; to rejoice in him is what we are exhorted to do, both in the Old and New Testaments. "Rejoice in the LORD, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright." (Psalm 33:1). Quick side note: The primary meaning in the Bible of "ye righteous" and "the upright" are those persons whom God has elected to salvation rendered "righteous" and "upright" by the imputed righteousness of Christ. God by an act of accounting renders and pronounces his people righteous by the imputation of Christ's righteousness to them. Therefore when God looks upon His people He sees his Son. "Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, ... true yokefellow[s] ... my fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life. Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice." (Philippians 4:1-3).  Our joy is not merely in him as the Creator, from whom we have our being, life, and  breath (Acts 17:28), and all things (Deuteronomy 28:47), which is source of joy. "Let  Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful in their King"  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 4  (Psalm 149:2)). Nor in him merely as the God of providence (Ephesians 1:8), and a kind benefactor (Luke 22:21), the preserver of men (Job 7:20), who gives them all things richly to enjoy (1 Timothy 6:17), so that they have reason to rejoice "in every good thing," which the Lord in his providence gives unto them (Deuteronomy 26:11). But more especially God's elect rejoice in him as their covenant God "I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels." (Isaiah 61:10). As her covenant God which is the sum and substance of the covenant, and includes and secures every blessing of it, and always continues. So David, in his last words pronounced his joy: "Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow." (2 Samuel 23:5). He is the God of all grace (1 Peter 5:20), and blesses with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places (Ephesians 1:3), and gives both grace and glory (Psalm 84:11), supplies all the wants of his people out of his riches in glory, by Christ (Philippians 4:19); and causes all grace to abound towards them (2 Corinthians 9:8), and will never suffer them to want any good thing (Psalm 34:10); he is their portion now, and will be forever; and as such they rejoice in him (Psalm 16:5, Psalm 73:26, Psalm 119:57, Psalm 142:5, Lamentations 3:24).  And, at least in the following particulars we find our joy--[a separate sermons could be written on each of these]--  In the attributes of God; which are dedicated on behalf of his people, and are exercised for their good, and they receive great benefits (a daily load, according to Psalm 68:19) and gain great advantage from them; including his power, wisdom, truth, faithfulness, goodness, grace, and mercy, justice, and holiness. "Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness." (Psalm 97:12).  The everlasting love of God is matter of great joy to the saints. "The LORD hath  appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love:  therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn thee." (Jeremiah 31:3). "For whom he did  foreknow [that is this everlasting love], he also did predestinate to be conformed to the  image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom  he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified:  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 5  and whom he justified, them he also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Romans 8:29-39). "Because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee." (Psalm 63:3). "Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better than wine. ... Draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine: the upright love thee." (Song of Solomon 1:2,4).  The saints' election of God is also a source of great joy to them. Luke 10:20:  "Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather  rejoice, because your names are written in heaven;" in the Lamb's book of life, in the  book of divine predestination to the adoption of children, and to eternal life. It is the  foundation blessing of grace. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,  who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: According as  he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy  and without blame before him in love: Having predestinated us unto the adoption of  children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, To the  praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved. In  whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the  riches of his grace; Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence;  Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure  which he hath purposed in himself: That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he  might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which  are on earth; even in him: In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being  predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 6  of his own will: That we should be to the praise of his glory." (Ephesians 1:3-12). They that are written in the Lamb's book of life enter into the New Jerusalem; and those who are predestinated are glorified. (Revelation 21:27; Romans 8:30). This is the foundation which stands sure; the seal of which is, "The Lord knows them that are his" (2 Timothy 21:19). Men are elect according to the foreknowledge of God, and that foreknowledge never fails; and therefore the purpose of God, according to election, stands sure; not upon the will and works of men, but upon the sovereign will, certain knowledge, and everlasting love of God; all which lay a solid foundation for joy and gladness. The covenant of grace God has made with his chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world, is another thing which yields abundance of joy to the believer, both in life and in death; in a view of which, with what joy does the Sweet Psalmist of Israel express in 2 Samuel 23:5: "Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow." What makes this covenant so desirable, pleasant, and joyful is, that it is "everlasting"; nor will it ever be broken, made null and void; nor be antiquated, and succeeded by another covenant; but will always remain in full force; and so administer constant and perpetual joy to the beneficiaries of that covenant. "I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil." (Psalm 119:162), which suggests a great degree of joy. To which may be added, that this covenant is free, absolute, and unconditional: its promises do not depend on conditions to be performed by men; "and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: ... And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me." (Jeremiah 32:38-40). So that David had great reason to say, "This is all my desire"; as containing in it all that was desirable by him, delightful to him, and that could afford him joy and pleasure. Christ, and things relating to him, are the objects of the spiritual joy of saints. "For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh." (Philippians 3:3). The things relating to him, which are matter and ground of joy, are such as relate both to his person and to his work. This sermon will address some grounds for joy in the elect as to his person, but another sermon has to be reserved for the great joy that results from his work.  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 7  As to his person, as the Word and Son of God, equally a divine person with his Father, "who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Hebrews 1:3). He is "the great God, and our Savior," (Titus 2:3). He is God over all blessed for ever (Romans 9:5). Therefore God's elect know and may conclude that his righteousness is the righteousness of God, and so unto and upon all them that believe; his blood is the blood of the Son of God, and as such has a virtue to cleanse from all sin; his sacrifice the sacrifice of himself, and so of a sweet smelling savour to God (2 Corinthians 2:15), and that sacrifice is efficacious to atone for sin (Isaiah 53:10); and his salvation a great salvation (Hebrews 2:4), plenteous and complete (Psalm 130:7); therefore also the elect are satisfied that they must be safe in his hands, out of which none can pluck them (John 10:28); that he is able to keep them from falling (Jude 1:24) , and to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him (Hebrews 7:24).  God's elect find great joy in the fitness of his person to be mediator between God and man (1 Timothy 2:5), to make reconciliation for the sins of the people (Hebrews 2:7); a work which neither angels nor men were fit for and capable of; but God in his infinite wisdom found Christ to be a proper person to give himself a ransom for his people, and deliver them from destruction (Job 33:24; Matthew 20:28).  God's elect find great joy in the fullness of his person; "for in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily" (Colossians 2:9), and the fullness of grace which it has pleased the Father should dwell in him, for the supply of the needs of his people; in which grace they are strong, "and of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace." (John 1:16).  God's elect find great joy in the beauty of his person. And so David expressed it as his  chief desire: "One thing have I desired of the LORD, that will I seek after; that I may  dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD,  and to enquire in his temple." (Psalm 27:4). Solomon sings: "My beloved is white and  ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are  bushy, and black as a raven. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters,  washed with milk, and fitly set. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his  lips like lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh. His hands are as gold rings set with the  beryl: his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires. His legs are as pillars of marble,  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 8  set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars. His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem." (Song of Solomon 5:10-16.)  (This sermon does not include the offices of Christ, of prophet, priest, and king; nor of the relations he stands to his people of father, husband, brother, friend, though these are great sources of joy to true believers and each deserve their separate study and rejoicing.)  Finally, as to the nature of this joy... This joy should be constant: the exhortations to it are, "Rejoice evermore," and "rejoice in the Lord always!" (1 Thessalonians 5:16 and Philippians 4:4) There is great encouragement from the Lord always to rejoice in him; and the character and condition of the people of God in this present state of things is, "as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing" (2 Corinthians 6:10). The apostle James exhorts believers: "my brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations; Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." (James 1:2-4).  However, it is imperfect in the present state, and often interrupted. Sometimes, through the prevalence of indwelling sin, and the breakings forth of the corruptions of the heart; so that saints have no rest in "their bones," no joy in their hearts "because of their sin"; and cry out with the apostle, "O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this death." This was sometimes the case of David, Isaiah, and the apostle Paul, in Psalm 38:3, Isaiah 6:5, and Romans 7:23-24. Sometimes through the temptations of Satan, who throws his fiery darts (Ephesians 6:16), which give pain, and grief; and when he has leave from the Lord, sifts as wheat is sifted (Luke 22:21), which occasions great disruption of our joy and peace and causes distress; and beats and buffets, which causes great trouble and uneasiness; and he goes about like a roaring lion, to frighten and terrify when he cannot devour (1 Peter 5:8). And also God hides his face from his people (Psalm 27:9, et al.), and they are troubled (Psalm 30:7); not only that but also left in such darkness and distress, as even to be distracted with terrors, and ready to die; as was the case with David, Heman, and others. (Psalm 55, Psalm 88, Jeremiah 17:7, etc.)  Yet, this joy will come again, be restored, and greatly increase. "For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." (Psalm 33:5). "Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which  THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  Page 9  thou hast broken may rejoice." (Psalm 51:8). Indeed there shall be an increase and overflow of joy; and it is promised, "The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord." (Isaiah 29:19). This is done by enlarging our heart with discoveries of the love of God, and a fresh shedding abroad of it in our heart (Romans 5:5); by Christ, the Sun of righteousness, arising with healing in his wings (Malachi 4:2); and by "the furtherance and the joy of faith" (Philippians 1:25). "Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD, to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant; Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people." (Isaiah 56:6-7) It is a joy that is unknown to the men of the world (Proverbs 14:10); it passes their understanding (Philippians 4:7); it is to them an enigma that the elect would be "as sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing" (2 Corinthian 6:10). Our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was about to depart this world, told us: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you." Psalm 97:11: "Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart." All along the way, at the right time and in the right place, pursuant to the wisdom of God, we get that measure of joy which is perfect pursuant to the "sure mercies" of God. (Isaiah 55:3; Acts 13:34). "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" (Romans 11:33). On November 13, 2013, Elias Asaph was born into the world. At the hospital delivery room that night I was assigned to the vestibule with a curtain between. Yet, the sounds told me what was going on in the birthing room: a woman in travail. It was intense; it was sorrowful; it was anguish. But as soon as Elias Asaph was born, the entire scene turned on a dime--from sorrow to joy! I love you. Amen. Page 10 THE JOY OF THE LORD IS THE STRENGTH OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH (May 18, 2014)  
