Sunday, November 29, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of  the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten  crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy... And power  was given him over ALL KINDREDS, AND TONGUES, AND NATIONS.  AND ALL THAT DWELL UPON THE EARTH SHALL WORSHIP HIM,  whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain  from the foundation of the world... And I beheld another beast  coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he  spake as a dragon. And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast  before him, and causeth THE EARTH AND THEM WHICH DWELL  THEREIN to worship the first beast." Rev. 13:1,7,8,11,12.  Think, ONE-WORLD GOVERNMENT. "And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many WATERS... And he saith unto me, The WATERS which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are PEOPLES, AND MULTITUDES, AND NATIONS, AND TONGUES." Rev. 17:1,15. Think, ONE-WORLD RELIGION. "With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness; and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns." (Rev. 17:2,3)  Think, ONE-WORLD GOVERNMENT + ONE-WORLD RELIGION = BEAST OBAMA, forever globe-trotting to shore up his Satanic domain. Lately in Japan, Asia, China. As per the AP headlines; to wit: "Obama, HU (Chinese President Hu Jintao) Hold Talks As World Watches." One article said: "In Beijing, President Barack Obama is opening his talks with China's leader by saying that strong dialogue between the U.S. and China benefit not just those two nations but the WHOLE WORLD. Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao today (Nov. 16, 2009) sat down for what the U.S. LEADER has called a `MEETING OF THE MINDS.' The topics for the meeting were expected to be the globe's biggest issues ­ climate change, economic recession, nuclear proliferation and more. Hu welcomed Obama to the second of three meetings and said he appreciated the United States' posture coming into the meetings. He says he looked forward to having an `in-depth relationship' with Obama."  The current issue of Forbes Business Magazine, lists the 40 most powerful men in the world, and Obama is #1. Next month Obama will travel to Oslo, Norway, to receive the prestigious Nobel Peace Prize. At every turn Obama is actively positioning himself to actually be, what he has long envisioned himself as becoming; to wit: The King of the World. He looks upon the American presidency as a kind of launching pad, or staging area, where he can romance the heads of state and through them the populations of the whole world ­ at the expense of the American taxpayers. Obama has recently traveled with a huge entourage to China and the Asian nations ­ accompanied with the mass media of the whole world, as an extension of Bernard Goldberg's bestselling book, A Slobbering Love Affair, Starring Barack Obama, The True (and Pathetic) Story of the Torrid Romance Between Barack Obama and the Mainstream Media.  It is absolutely essential that Antichrist enjoy just exactly the relationship that Obama has with the Mass Media of the world. It is also absolutely essential that Antichrist enjoy just exactly the relationship that Obama has with China and the other nations of the world.  Sunday, November 29, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  In a huge front page story by the Associated Press carried by the newspapers of the world,  including the Kansas City Star, Monday, Nov. 16, 2009, the One-World Government plans of  Barack Obama are seen taking shape; to wit: "President Barack Obama is walking a tightrope on  his first trip to China, seeking to enlist help in tackling global problems while weighing when ­ or  if ­ he should raise human rights concerns." Yes indeed. Who ever heard of the bloody tyrant  Antichrist ­ the Beast of Rev. 13 ­ having the least concern about First Amendment, free speech,  freedom of religion, or any other human right ­ unless there is some political benefit to be gained  thereby ­ some cheap, demagogic, expedient benefit. Obama is on the hunt for votes.  Antichristic votes! Votes by the global heads of state ­ votes for Obama ­ voting Obama in as  King of the World ­ Antichrist!  The AP piece on Obama in China continued; to wit: "Thirty years after the start of diplomatic relations, the two nations are partnering more than ever... China is a huge and lucrative market for American goods and services ... Obama has talked warmly toward China... `The United States does not seek to contain China,' Obama said Saturday in a speech from Tokyo, `On the contrary, the rise of a strong, prosperous China can be a source of strength for the community of nations' (get that ecumenical verbiage, "the community of nations.") ...The White House hoped today's town hall meeting with Chinese university students would allow Obama to telegraph U.S. values to the widest Chinese audience possible." In short, Obama is working at a fever pitch to bring about a merger between a One-World Government and a One-World Religion ­ a kind of Satanic theocracy, ruled by a Demon-possessed Beast, Antichrist Obama.  At the turn of the last century ­ (the 1800's giving way to the 1900's) ­ there were a few good preachers, and all of them were expressing great alarm at what they called the One-World-ism of the coming Antichrist. It came to be known as Ecumenicalism and later, as Interdenominationalism. Old Dr. Bob Jones mocked the movement, saying if they all became one, the Devil would only have to swallow once to reach them all.  Great alarm went out upon the publication of a popular book by the famous Methodist author/missionary heretic, E. Stanley Jones, entitled, The Christ of the Round Table; in which Jones portrayed the Lord Jesus Christ as merely another religious leader seated with all other religious leaders at a perfectly round table ­ with no head of the table. Call the roll of all religions and all religious leaders: Various Muslim sects and the prophet Mohammed, Hindus, Shintos, Buddhists, Catholics, Protestants, Methodists, Baptists, Jews, etc. The old preachers saw what was coming ­ in the light of the Bible's clear warnings of the Beast of Revelation, and the Man of Sin of 2 Thes., chap. 2; to wit: "Let no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that MAN OF SIN be revealed, THE SON OF PERDITION; Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshiped." (2 Thes. 2:3,4)  (Think, Obama). One-World Government plus One-World Religion must merge into one man ­ the Beast, Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition. Men have arisen from time to time on the world's stage who may have satisfied the One-World Government test, OR, the One-World Religion test. But never before the advent of Barack Hussein Obama have the two tests been even arguably satisfied in one man. The old preachers saw with dire apprehension a League of Nations arise after World War I ­ championed by President Woodrow Wilson, who killed himself trying to make the League succeed ­ and the preachers killed the League with warnings from the Bible. With the passage of time, what few faithful preachers we had left began to die off, with none to replace them.  Sunday, November 29, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Along came World War II, after which the Devil took another run at forming a One-World  Government, to be called the United Nations. But they were too few and too spiritually weak and  cowardly to stop the UN from forming and growing by leaps and bounds. Beloved, make no  mistake. Satan has a powerful lust for World-Empire building. He once offered the Lord Jesus Christ all the kingdoms of the world if only our blessed Savior would fall down and worship him; to wit:  "Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil... Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the KINGDOMS OF THE WORLD, AND THE GLORY OF THEM; And saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, IF THOU WILT FALL DOWN AND WORSHIP ME." (Mat. 4:1,8,9)  One-World Government building ­ Empire-building ­ from the ancient days of Nimrod ­ involves Devil-Worship. Notice carefully that our dear Lord Jesus in the wilderness did not challenge Satan's ownership of the kingdoms of the world and thus Satan's right to bargain away those kingdoms; to wit: "Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him." (Mat. 4:10,11)  We are dealing here with the wiles of the devil, with powers of Satanic darkness, and we are wrestling with the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. (Eph. 6:10-12.) Think Obama. And think, Nimrod. Both of whom are cursed, dark-skinned, seed of Ham and Cush; to wit: "And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter BEFORE THE LORD; wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod, the mighty hunter BEFORE THE LORD. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah. And Resen between Nineveh and Calah; the same is a great city." (Gen. 10:8-12)  Beloved, ours is the duty to discern the signs of the time, and to rightly divide the word of truth, and to preach it just that way. So when the phenomenon like black Obama rises out of the restless sea of mankind's mire and dirt, becomes the most powerful man in the world according to Forbes Magazine, with enough nuclear weapons at his fingertips to destroy the planet; and begins globetrotting the globe to consolidate his position as king of the world; and then ­ AND THEN ­ Antichrist-Beast-Obama fills the adoring mass media of the world that we must bow down and worship at the Satanic altar of ecumenicalism ­ I say when these signals of apostasy and countless more like them (e.g., Obama told a town hall meeting in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, on March 29, 2008, "We've got two daughters nine years old and six years old. I'm going to teach them first of all about values and morals, but if they make a mistake, I don't want them punished with a baby.").  This black jackass will abort, i.e., murder, his own grandchildren, if his daughters are promiscuous, get pregnant, and don't want to keep and raise the Obama offspring. I say, when we at Westboro Baptist Church see these Nimrodic signs coming to pass, it is time for us to preach God's Word and tell the world all about Nimrod and Obama and the nine-mile tall Tower of Babel out on the plains of old Shinar; to wit: "And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech. And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and  Sunday, November 29, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.  And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto  heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of  the whole earth. AND THE LORD CAME DOWN to see the city and the tower,  which the children of men builded." (Gen. 11:1-5)  Think Obama. Think Nimrod. Think Muslim. Think "Dubai Tower." William Greenhill (15811659), has established himself as the final word of authority on the book of Ezekiel, the title of his work being, An Exposition of the Prophet Ezekiel, with Useful Observations Thereupon Delivered in Several Lectures in London, 1650 A.D. Greenhill is to Ezekiel what Caryl is to Job. Such is the thoroughness of Caryl to Job, that virtually the entire Scripture is expounded in the process of expounding Job. Even so, virtually the whole Bible is expounded by Greenhill in the process of expounding Ezekiel.  It was inevitable that Greenhill should reach the fascinating subjects of Nimrod and the Tower of Babel at Genesis chapters 10 and 11; to wit: "The chief city in Chaldea was Babylon, now called Bagdat, from Baga, which in Arabic signifieth a garden, because it stood in a pleasant place, and had many gardens in it. It was built by Nimrod, that mighty hunter, the first king that ever the world had. (Think, Obama!) When the tower in it was built up NINE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED THREESCORE AND FOUR (9,164) PACES from the ground, which is ABOVE NINE OF OUR MILES (!), then it pleased God from heaven to confound their language, and of one made threescore and twelve (i.e., from one language for all mankind, to 72 separate and distinct languages); hence was it called Babel, Gen. 11:9, because God there confounded the language of all the earth, and their work together;" to wit: "And the Lord said, Behold, THE PEOPLE IS ONE ­ (Note: Here the Lord condemns as intrinsically evil the Satanic notions of ONE-WORLD GOVERNMENT and ONE-WORLD RELIGION, as espoused by black Nimrod and his reincarnated black Obama) ­ I say, "THE PEOPLE IS ONE, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do;" ­ (and the thing is already nine miles high and the sky's the limit to their idolatry, lust and greed) ­ "and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth; and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth; and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth." Gen. 11:6-9.  Beloved. Our Father is speaking to us even now, providentially, from the Arabian sands of modern Dubai, United Arab Emirates, where the Bible-ignorant Muslims claim to be nearing completion of what they claim "is the tallest man-made structure ever built at 2,684 ft." Little over half a mile tall. Tinker toys. Greenhill says over nine miles tall. Gill says up to twelve miles tall. Still, Dubai's Tower is twice as tall as the Empire State Bldg. ­ and keeps the subject of man's rebellion against God constantly in the news. Even now the Muslims are mounting a campaign for an international ban on Gospel preaching against Islam. (See, Topeka Capital-Journal, Fri., Nov. 20, 2009, page 5A.)  One-World Empire -- from Nimrod to Obama ­ rejects God, denies His right to rule, refuses to acknowledge man's total dependence on God for power or happiness, deprives the triune God of the gratitude and allegiance of men, lusts for dominion apart from God over this world, exalts man to the place of God, and is the arch enemy and rebel against God.  I love you.  Amen.  
