Sunday, August 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "I beheld till the thrones were cast down (or, rather, till the thrones were set up ­ i.e., the thrones of the Father, the Son, and His overcoming saints; to wit: ,,To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne ­ Rev. 3:21), and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool; his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the judgment was set, and the books were opened. ... I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. ... But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever." Dan. 7:9-18.  Beloved, this is truly an awesome sight, probably going into deep space to accommodate the myriads of Elect angels (1 Tim. 5:21) and the redeemed from among mankind from Adam to the end of time; and then multiply that staggering figure by the hundreds, or thousands, or even, possibly, millions of the damned from among the rebellious angels and impenitent human-kind. And it is self-evident that all such majestic activity must, in reason, have exalted language in describing, or otherwise speaking of same; e.g.: "The Lord executeth righteousness and JUDGMENT FOR ALL THAT ARE OPPRESSED. ... To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them. The Lord hath prepared HIS THRONE in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all. Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord, all his works in all places of his dominion; bless the Lord, O my soul." (Psa. 103:6,18-22) The Prophet Daniel kept looking at the dreams and visions which the Lord God brought before him until he saw all earthly thrones and empires demolished, and all rule, power, and authority put down, and way made for the Messiah and His saints with Him finally to take the INFERIOR THRONES and the kingdom. This has been the Gospel message from God to the sons of men since the beginning of time; to wit: "Behold, the Lord cometh," cried faithful Enoch, who was raptured, because he had this testimony before his rapture, that he pleased God; to wit: "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God." Heb. 11:5. I say, "Behold, the lord cometh," cried the prophet Enoch, "to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." Jude 14 & 15.  Think of it, Beloved. These sample passages from God's Holy Word hold forth an undeniable, imminent scenario of billions and billions of vile sinners with an infinite number of sins, all of which must be tried before a huge but finite number of inferior courts and THRONES, supervised by God the Father and God the Son upon the Great White Throne. Something very much like I have described is held to view by the prophet Daniel at Dan. 7:9 & 10.  Sunday, August 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions render it thusly; to wit: "I beheld until the  thrones were set up; for the judges to sit upon, to try, judge, and condemn all (of guilty mankind); in  order to make way for the kingdom of the Son of man to take place in the spirituality and the glory of it; here are more thrones than one;" see Rev. 20:4:  "And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them; and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years." (Rev. 20:4)  The ancient Jews say, here were two thrones pitched and prepared, one for the Ancient of days, and another for David, that is, the Messiah, of son of David; and so Rabbi Jarchi paraphrases the words, "the thrones were pitched and prepared to sit upon in judgment;" and this sense is confirmed by the use of the word in the Targum on 2 Kgs. 18:14, and Jer. 1:15-16 - "For, lo, I will call all the families of the  kingdoms of the north, saith the Lord; and they shall come, and they shall set every one his throne at  the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and against all  the cities of Judah. And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who  have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands." And to this agrees best the following clause: "and the Ancient of days did sit," on one of the  thrones pitched, as Chief Judge, to be understood as God the Father, as distinct from the Messiah, the  Son of God. The Ancient of days is so-called not only because He is from everlasting, and without  beginning of days; but chiefly because He is permanent, and endures for ever; His years fail not, and of  His days there will be no end; and He will be when all earthly powers and empires will be no more; and  He is very fit and proper to be Judge of them all, because of His consummate wisdom and prudence; and  the divine Father of Christ is still more proper, because it is in the holy cause of Christ the slain Lamb of  God that these majestic judicial proceedings are launched and go forward, and that, to eternity.  Beloved, simply put, the holy Father shares His throne with His holy Son; and the Son shares His throne with His holy people for whom He died. The garment of the Father is white as snow, denoting the purity of His nature, the brightness of His majesty, and the incorruptible nature of His judgments. The hair of His head is white as the pure wool, signifying His venerableness, gravity, wisdom, and ripeness of judgment; being wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. His throne is said to be like the fiery flame; expressive of Him, as awful and formidable, as a consuming fire; and of His piercing judgment, and the severity of it. His throne is said to have wheels as burning fire; alluding to such seats and thrones as were made to turn about, and to be moved from place to place; denoting the power and providence of sovereign God everywhere; the clear view He has of all things, in all places; and the swiftness in the execution of His judgments.  Beloved. How grand that we should be an integral part to all such eternal activity as is held to our enraptured view of all such holy things. But, there is more. We are told that a fiery stream issued and came forth from before Him Who sits upon the throne. Or, a river of fire! Which denotes the thorough and copious nature of the judgments of God; the abundance of them; the full flow of His wrath, and the fierceness of it; and also its rapidity, which cannot be resisted and stopped. One thousand thousands (i.e., millions) minister unto Him; attend upon him, wait His orders, ready to execute them; and ten thousand times ten thousand (fewer millions?) stand before Him, to be judged by Him. Then we are told by the prophet Daniel that the judgment was set; that is, the court was set (by the oft-used technique called the prophetic present); the Judge was upon the bench, and all His assessors and appraisers about Him, and that minister to Him. And the books were opened; both to take the trial in writing, and to produce evidence against the criminals; the book of God's purposes and decrees as to the persecution and ill-  Sunday, August 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  treatment of His Elect; the book of God's remembrance, and of their own consciences, with respect to  the evils committed by them; and the book of records, statutes, and laws made in such cases; even the book of the Scriptures, which contains the revelation of the will of God. Paul on Mars' Hill dealt  decisively with this most universally vital of all subjects; to wit:  "And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commandeth all men every where to repent; Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them. Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed." (Acts 17:30-34)  When Paul sat down to write the greatest theological treatise ever written, he was very shortly ­ and inevitably ­ plunged into the subject of the Great Day of Judgment before the thrones of God and the  Lord Jesus Christ; to wit:  "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves; Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another; In the day when GOD SHALL JUDGE THE SECRETS OF MEN BY JESUS CHRIST according to my gospel." (Rom. 2:14-16) "And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment." (Heb. 9:27)  "But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things, GOD WILL BRING THEE INTO JUDGMENT. Therefore remove sorrow (or, rather, anger) from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh; for childhood and youth are vanity. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them." (Eccl. 11:8 ­ 12:1) In the Last Judgment, ­ as aforesaid herein, and as it seems to me ­ there will be several thrones; to wit: God the Father's; God the Son's; ­ (also called the Judgment Seat of Christ) - "But why dost thou judge  thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before THE JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST," (Rom. 14:10.); and those millions of ancillary thrones to be occupied by all God's Elect as an extension of Christ's throne, given unto His grand Overcomers as an integral part of their inheritance; to wit: "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in MY THRONE, even as I also overcame, and am set down WITH MY FATHER IN HIS THRONE." Rev. 3:21. "Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints? Do ye not know that THE SAINTS SHALL JUDGE THE WORLD? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that WE SHALL JUDGE ANGELS? How much more things that pertain to this life? If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, SET THEM TO JUDGE WHO ARE LEAST ESTEEMED IN THE CHURCH." (1 Cor. 6:1-4) Yes, Beloved, each of God's precious Elect will have a throne and a huge, huge case-load to manage and  adjudicate, as an integral part of his joy unspeakable and full of glory, which is a necessary part of his  Sunday, August 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  eternal inheritance. Yes, Beloved, "As a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away; like the  untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun. Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath. (Yes,) THE RIGHTEOUS  SHALL REJOICE WHEN HE SEETH THE VENGEANCE; he shall wash his feet in the blood of  the wicked. So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth." Psa. 58:8-11. My reasons for believing that each of God's Heavenly Adjudicators will have a huge, huge case-load of wicked sinners to manage is three-fold; to wit: (1) the ratio of saved to lost suggests it. For example, in Noah's day, the ratio was seven good people to approximately 12  billion lost souls. Today, the ratio is approximately 100 good people to approximately 7 billion lost, Hell-  bound reprobates. Etc.; (2) The Lord Jesus Himself suggested it, when He was asked if there were many saved: "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to  destruction, and MANY THERE BE which go in thereat; Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and FEW THERE BE that find it." Mat. 7:13,14. (3) The evidence is  good for the proposition that with the passage of time into and throughout eternity, the damned in Hell  continue to sin and rebel against and curse God more and more, and thereby increasing the thickness of  the case-load files; to wit:  "And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments. And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. And men were scorched with great heat, AND BLASPHEMED THE NAME OF GOD, which hath power over these plagues: AND THEY REPENTED NOT to give him glory. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; AND THEY GNAWED THEIR TONGUES FOR PAIN, AND BLASPHEMED THE GOD OF HEAVEN BECAUSE OF THEIR PAINS and their sores, AND REPENTED NOT OF THEIR DEEDS." (Rev. 16:5-11) Thus you see, Beloved, that our services as associate Supreme Court judges will still be required ­ and forever increasing more so ­ as eternal ages roll on; and, everlastingly shall the divine promise hold good; to wit: "THE RIGHTEOUS SHALL REJOICE WHEN HE SEETH THE VENGEANCE; he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked." Psa. 58:10. The United States Constitution, Article III, says that "The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish." Theoretically, there is no limit to the number of such "inferior" or lower courts ­ all under "One Supreme Court." Something like that applies to the arrangement of Heaven's Great White Throne and such lower courts as the finite number of God's Elect shall eventually prove to be. Maybe, millions. (All, White, the symbol of purity,  justice and equity.) I believe Jude 14 & 15 proves what I said about possibly millions helping with the final judgments; to wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands (i.e., innumerable myriads) of his saints, To execute judgment upon all." Jd. 14,15. In Heaven's Grand Constitution, the Bible, provision is made for a SUPREME Supreme Court; to wit: "And I saw a Great White Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; ... (as to) those things which were written in the books. ... And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:11-15)  I love you. Amen.  
