Sermon Outline - Sunday, December 22, 2013 The Broad and Narrow Ways Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them, strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able (Luke 13:23-24). Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it (Mat. 7:13-14). 2. Pope Francis Mass at Rio's Copacabana Beach ­ Wide/Broad Way, 3,000,000 People 1. The Hillary Step ­ Strait/Difficult & Narrow Way, Few People Beloved, every human being that has lived in the past, is living presently or will ever live in the future is a traveler. Like it or not you too are a traveler. You are on a road and you are going to one of two destinations and there is no third. Like every depraved son or daughter of Adam you naturally start out on the broad way. Like any road there are signs and landmarks along the way that tell you where you are and where you are headed. These roads are no different. It does not escape my notice that this generation regularly turns these direct and crystal clear words of the Lord Jesus Christ on their head and thereby make Him a liar. We should be 1  sensitive to this device of Satan. If the Lord Jesus Christ plainly and unequivocally proclaims the way to life/heaven is narrow and the faux Christians say "God loves everyone" and by inference declare that everyone goes to heaven, they make Christ a liar. They make by application the word of God "of none effect" which Christ scolded the Jews for in Mat. 15:6. Because with lies ye have... strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life (Eze. 13:22). Let God be true and every man a liar. (Rom. 3:4.) It is not let man be true and God a liar. Beware beloved, by the time the phony Christians get done there is only one way and only one destination and everyone is on it. And, it is a relatively easy road and all you have to do is love everything. That is a satanic lie. I want to heighten your sensitivity and particularly the sensitivity of the young people to that ploy. I. STRAIT IS THE GATE & NARROW IS THE WAY THAT LEADS TO LIFE & FEW FIND IT The word "strait" in Luke 13 and Mat. 7 does not mean s-t-r-a-i-g-h-t like a straight line. It instead means narrow, tight, limited in space or time, constricted, strict, close fitting, and difficult. This is what the road to heaven looks like according to the Lord Jesus Christ. Gill says: It is a hard matter to get to heaven; it is not gained without a great deal of care, pain, suffering, difficulty and diligence. The righteous are scarcely saved (1 Pet. 4:18). If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him (2Tim. 2:12). If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you (John 15:19). For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. (1 John 5:4). Each of the seven Churches of Asia in Rev. 2 and 3 are specifically warned by the Lord Jesus Christ to overcome the difficulties of the world to attain eternal life. If you fail to overcome you fail the test. Christ bids us to strive to enter in at the strait gate (Luke 13:24.) Strong's Concordance says that the word "strive" means: to fight, to contend with adversaries, to struggle with difficulties and dangers, to endeavor with strenuous zeal to obtain something. I want to give you a visual of both of these ways that will burn into you young people's minds what these ways look like. Photo one is the Hillary Step which is on Mount Everest. Mount Everest stands at 29,035 feet. To even reach the Hillary Step you must transverse a series of incredible tests, -30 degree temperatures, snow and ice storms, howling wind, crossing icy aluminum ladder/bridges over crevices, scaling cliffs, and walking on tight 2' ridges with thousand foot drop-offs on either side. Beloved, this is dangerous stuff and leaving with less than what you came with is a true reality here. Two men summited Everest once and between them, they lost 17 toes, due to frost bite. Losing body parts and even your life is a very real possibility. Anything above 26,000 feet is considered in the "death zone." The death zone is at the edge of Earth's atmosphere. In the death zone there is one-quarter of the oxygen found at sea level. If you have ever been in the mountains and ran up even a little hill and after only a few steps you were out of breath, it is like that, but much more extreme since mountains in say Colorado are 14,000 feet, or half of 2  Everest. In the death zone, people get winded just talking. Most people cannot climb in the death zone without oxygen tanks and even with oxygen, most people can only stay 24-48 hours, because the body starts breaking down. The Hillary Step is deep in the death zone at 28,740 feet. It is the last major obstacle to the summit of Everest. It is 40 feet of treacherous ice, straight up. It is only passable 4-6 weeks a year. Every single decision that is made there is life or death. The margin of error there is very small. There are right now 200 bodies laying open in the death zone right off the beaten path, because there is no way to reach them or physically get them down. 1 in 15 that go to the death zone, die there. Eighty-percent of those that die in the death zone do so on the way back from the Summit. This is due to fatigue, exhaustion, exposure, falling, slips, and pulmonary edema (a buildup of fluid in the lungs) among other things. They say if you find a backpack there, the body is not far behind. You do not get to the Hillary Step by accident, this is a choice that you make in the light of day like Moses...Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God... (the strait and narrow way) (Heb. 11:25). Beloved, we must be careful not to get weary on this path. And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. (Gal. 6:9) and brethren, be not weary in well doing (2 Thes. 3:13). There is no way to get through the Hillary Step without striving. That is, fighting, contending with adversities, struggling with difficulties and dangers, or endeavoring with strenuous zeal. The landscape, terrain and environment in this way are difficult. When you are on the Hillary Step, like when you are on the narrow way to heaven, there is no turning to the right hand or the left hand, it is an ultra-confining space with dire consequences if you do. We dwell in the clefts of the rock (Sol. 2:14, Ex. 33:22). This is not a place for frivolity or for taking your ease. It is a place of absolute sobriety. When you get to the Hillary Step there is no place to sleep. You climb from Camp IV, past the Hillary Step to the Summit and back. You leave at 9:30 at night and you walk and climb through the night and you do not get back for 18-36 hours depending on the weather. The New Testament specifically warns us about sobriety. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober (1Thes. 5:6.) Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour (1 Pet. 5:8). Specific warnings of sobriety are mentioned in the New Testament to the following: bishops (1 Thes. 3:2), bishops' wives (1 Tim. 3:11), aged men (Tit. 2:2), aged/young women (Tit. 2:4), and young men (Tit. 2:6). This environment is extremely unpleasant to the flesh. It typically takes a minimum of four weeks (depending on weather) in just climbing to get to the Hillary Step. Beloved, every step is difficult with a wide variety of stumbling blocks. Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed (Rom. 9:33). I saw an interview with an experienced climber who summited Everest. He was traumatized over the push to the Summit not because of the cold, or lack of oxygen or that he had a constant death zone headache, but because he encountered three fresh dead bodies in the path. He had to step over one of the dead bodies because it was directly in his path. No one apparently had the energy to move it off. He was haunted by it. He asked the three Sherpa's 3  that were responsible for each of the dead people what happened. All three reported telling those dead people not to attempt the summit because it was too late, the conditions were too poor and they each individually were too tired. In each case the individuals decided to ignore the advice of the Sherpa's. The climber said he concluded that what they died of was... arrogance [and pride]. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible (Isa. 13:11). Beloved, arrogance and pride are killers on this narrow way. We must endure hardness (2 Tim. 2:3), must wrestle and be in an agony, must watch in all things, and walk with care and circumspection. We must go through much tribulation. You must acknowledge and clearly understand you are on this road and there are perils everywhere. In the Luke version, the Lord Jesus Christ is asked "Lord, are there few that be saved?" Gill says that the Jews have a belief that all Israel shall have a part in the world to come. This was a belief of general atonement for the Israelites, just like the faux Christians today. Interestingly, He does not answer the question directly in that passage. But in the Matthew version Christ answers directly ­ he says "few there be that find" this way to heaven. The answer is "yes." Beloved, this is a hard way to find ­ difficult to see, difficult to perceive, and difficult to achieve. It is hidden from the flesh. "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called (1 Cor. 1:26). Christ said "for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able" (Luke 13:24). But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost (2 Cor. 4:3.) Beloved, many today are seeking to enter in, but shall not be able. This is consistent with why He spake to the people in parables (Mat. 13:11-13). The number of people in the first picture is relatively consistent with eight souls being saved in the flood (1 Pet. 3:20, Luke 17:26-33) and three people at Sodom. Beloved, this Matthew 7:13 and Luke 13:24 "strait gate;" is the same gate as in Rev. 22:14 Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. Matthew Henry says: Conversion and regeneration are the gate, by which we enter into this way, in which we begin a life of faith and serious godliness; out of a state of sin into a state of grace we must pass, by the new birth, John 3:3,5. This is a strait gate, hard to find, and hard to get through; like a passage between two rocks, #1Sam. 14:4. There must be a new heart, and a new spirit, and old things must pass away. The bent of the soul must be changed, corrupt habits and customs broken off; what we have been doing all our days must be undone again. We must swim against the stream; much opposition must be struggled with, and broken through, from without, and from within. It is easier to set a man against all the world than against himself, and yet this must be in conversion. It is a strait gate, for we must stoop, or we cannot go in at it; we must become as little children; high thoughts must be brought down; nay, we must strip away this flesh, must deny ourselves, put off the world, put off the old man; we must be willing to forsake all for our interest in Christ. Beloved, blessed be God, the path is strait but the door is not shut up, nor locked against us, nor kept with a flaming sword, but the day is coming and will soon be, that the door will be shut 4  up. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh (Matt. 25:10-13.) Andrew Fuller (1754-1815) said: To escape the wrath to come you must give up all hope of mercy on the grounds of good deeds and give up all your former idols without a single reserve. You must meet with contempt from the world, persecution from your connections, hard speeches from loose professors, annoyed by temptations from without, confounded by strong struggles within, old companions will invite you to turn back, the allurement of the world may be placed on the right hand and on the left to induce you to turn aside. That said, this way is infinitely less rugged than that in which Jesus walked to accomplish your salvation. You will have little company on your way. You may reside in a place where no one cares for Christ, or in a family that calls not upon His name. You will be the object of derision, a man wondered at, and persecuted; and even hated by your nearest relations! But be of good cheer; though there be few ­ who will accompany you, yet those few are the excellent of the earth. You will also hold society with an innumerable, invisible host of heavily spirits that will watch over you, fear not, be of good cheer. Beloved, we on this same road must help each other. You see the difficulty we face. It is the reason we must have charity (1 Pet. 4:8), good communication (Heb. 13:16), and be extraordinarily patient (James 5:7). II. WIDE IS THE GATE & BROAD IS THE WAY, THAT LEADETH TO DESTRUCTION & MANY GO THEREAT The second picture is the Catholic Mass at Rio's Copacabana Beach this year which the Pope attended. There were 3,000,000 people there. Under anyone's definition this would constitute "many." A broad way has little, if any, physical, or environmental limitations to it by definition. It is a direct and easy way. In that manner it is like cows headed for the slaughter house. They are comforted by having a great herd around them but they are all headed to the same single destination and the same single destruction. They are deceived. Satan is the great deceiver. He has deceived the whole world (Rev. 12:9). His deceit is to convince you that while you are entering in at the wide gate and you are on the broad way that you are actually on the road to heaven. Muddled thinking, confusion and anything that dulls the senses are his allies. Satan is marketing an illusion. Beloved, if something is too good to be true, it is. Gehazi got Naaman's treasure, but he also got his leprosy (2 Kings 5). 5  A broad, wide, easy way to heaven is exactly the opposite of what the Lord Jesus Christ says good looks like and he should know because he is the architect, designer and the one that laid the bounds of these great ways. The Lord Jesus Christ says at Matt. 24:8-24 regarding the last days: these are the beginning of sorrows, you will be afflicted, you will be killed, you will be hated of all nations, many of you will be offended, you will betray one another, many false prophets will arise and shall deceive many. Iniquity shall abound and the love of many shall wax cold, but he that shall endure unto the end, shall be saved. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. There is powerful deception here beloved. On the broad way there is nothing to hedge in those that walk in it, but they wander endlessly; there are many paths on it (the way of covetousness, sexual perversion, pride, murder, lying, greed, idolatry, etc.). There is a choice of sinful ways, but all paths in this broad way lead to the same place. It can accommodate enormous numbers of people at one time. It feels good to be on the broad way. It's a day at the beach. It is a party atmosphere. There are little cares and worries about eternity and hell. It is well-trodden because many people have walked the path before you and the way is now smooth and easy. There is nothing to stumble at like on the narrow way. There are little, if any, obstacles or restrictions on this path, anything goes. That gate is always open to invite you in. It absolutely caters to depraved inclinations of the flesh. People on this path are "enjoying the pleasures of sin for a season" (Heb. 12:25). As soon as the soul is engaged in the journey it pulls that direction. There is no speed limit on the way, because you have no obstacles to encounter. It is like the autobahn in Germany. The gate is so large and so broad it doesn't look like a gate anymore. You know they have zoos now that do not have any bars. Not a single one. But the animals are caged nonetheless, the cages are just more difficult to see. They use natural barriers like dense woods or camouflaged fences or high rocks to create the cage. That is the deceit ­ you have to perceive the cage. If you have sheep eyes you can see the gate is wide and way is broad and where it leads so it is easily distinguishable from the other way. Gill says: there is no difficulty in finding out, or entering in at, or walking in the way of sin, which leads to eternal ruin. The gate of carnal lusts, and worldly pleasures, stands wide open and many there be which go in thereat; even all men in a state of nature; the way of the ungodly is "broad," smooth, easy, and every way agreeable to the flesh; it takes in a large compass of vices, and has in it abundance of company; but its end is destruction. Matthew Henry says: The reason why many come short of grace and glory and end up on this way is because they rest in a lazy seeking of that which will not be attained without a laborious striving. There are but two ways and kinds of people: right and wrong, good and evil, godly and ungodly, saints and sinners, and those on the path that leads to heaven and those on the path that leads to hell. If we follow the multitude, it will be to do evil: if we go with the crowd, it will be the wrong way. It is natural for us to incline to go down the stream, and do as the most do; but it is too great to be willing to be damned for the company and to go to hell with them. The gate being so strait and the way so narrow, it is not strange that there are but few that find it, and choose it. Many pass it by, through carelessness; they will not be at the pains to find it; 6  they are well as they are, and see no need to change their way. Others look upon it, but shun it; they like not to be so limited and restrained. Those that are going to heaven are but few, compared to those that are going to hell; a remnant, a little flock, like the grape-gleanings of the vintage; as the eight that were saved in the ark. In the ways of vice, men urge each other onward: how shall anyone be restored to the path of safety, when impelled forwards by the multitude, without any counteracting influence? This discourages many: they are loathe to be singular, to be solitary.  Andrew Fuller: On the wide way you be in no want of company. Rich and poor, rude and learned: it is impossible you should be at a loss for agreeable society. The majority will be on your side. The majority of every nation, city, and town in the world. Your fellow travelers will be everywhere to keep you company, but the end is death.  Thomas Brooks says: Friendship with wicked consorts is one of the strongest chains of hell, and binds us to a participation in both their sin and their punishment.  If you wake up one day in 10 or 15 years if the Lord tarries and you are comforted by the multitude around you, by an easy path that is accommodating to diversities, with no mention of the commandments, where limits on your behavior are unheard of and where religious persecution is foreign to you ...you took the wrong path. You voluntarily strayed back to your nativity and exited the strait gate and narrow way and are on the way to Sodom. You will be gaining your life and therefore ultimately you will lose it (Mark 8:34-35).  Some might say, the Hillary Step is not the right comparison to the narrow way Christ refers to. That the way to life is not that difficult, not that steep, not that remote, not that treacherous and not that limiting. Here is a short list of why the Hillary Step is dead on accurate.  No. Requirements to Enter in at Verse Citation the Strait Gate  Requirements to Enter in at the Wide  Gate  1. Give up father or mother.  Mat. 10:34-37 - Think not that I None  am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his  father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.  And a man's foes shall be they of his own household. He that loveth  father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.  7  2. Give up daughter or son.  Luke 12:51-53 53 The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother. Mat. 10:34-37, Luke 12:51-53  None  3. Give up brothers, sisters, Mark 10:29 And Jesus answered None  spouses and all family and said, Verily I say unto you,  relations.  There is no man that hath left  house, or brethren, or sisters, or  father, or mother, or wife, or  children, or lands, for my sake,  and the gospel's,  30 But he shall receive an  hundredfold now in this time,  houses, and brethren, and sisters,  and mothers, and children, and  lands, with persecutions; and in  the world to come eternal life.  4. The world is going to hate you. John 7:7, John 15:18-20, 1 John The world will love  3:13, 1 Cor. 4:10  you.  John 15:18 If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord.  5. Wrongly jailed.  1 Cor 4:9-10 ... for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised. Acts 26:30-32 30 And when he (Paul) had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the  Peace  8  governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them: 31 And when they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds. 32 Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar.  Mat. 27:24 When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it. 6. Suffer public humiliations, Mat. 5:11 Blessed are ye, when Easy street reproaches and persecution. men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.  Phil 1:29 For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.  1 Pet. 4:14 If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.  7. Have your wages changed 10 Gen. 31:6-7 ­ And ye know that  times.  with all my power I have served  your father (talking to Rachel and  Leah). And your father (Laban)  hath deceived me, and changed  my wages ten times; but God  suffered him not to hurt me.  8. Sued in court.  Mat. 5:40 And if any man will sue Private revenge  thee at the law, and take away  thy coat, let him have thy cloke  also.  9. Assaulted and battered.  Lu 6:29 And unto him that They commit the  9  smiteth thee on the one cheek assaults and batteries offer also the other...  1 Kings 22:24 But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?  Acts 5:40 ...and when they (the Council of the Jews) had called the apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.  Ac 17:5 But the Jews which  believed not, moved with envy,  took unto them certain lewd  fellows of the baser sort, and  gathered a company, and set all  the city on an uproar, and  assaulted the house of Jason, and  sought to bring them out to the  people.  10. Refuse to be afraid of what Mat. 10:28 And fear not them Are afraid of man  man can do.  which kill the body, but are not  able to kill the soul: but rather  fear him which is able to destroy  both soul and body in hell.  Phil 1:28 And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.  11. Death and torture  Heb. 11:36-37 And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins  They commit these crimes and think they do God a favor (John 16:2).  10  and goatskins; being destitute,  afflicted, tormented...  12. Do not walk after the lusts of 1st Pet. 2:11 Dearly beloved, I Proudly walk after the  the flesh and keep the beseech you as strangers and lusts of the flesh  commandments of God.  pilgrims, abstain from fleshly  lusts, which war against the soul;  Eph 2:3 Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.  Re 22:14 Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.  Mt 19:17 ... but if thou wilt enter  into life, keep the  commandments.  13. Experience great tribulation for Rev. 7:13 And one of the elders Experience the normal  their spiritual beliefs/conduct answered, saying unto me, What adversities common  and service to the Living and are these which are arrayed in to all men.  True God.  white robes? and whence came  they? And I said unto him, Sir,  thou knowest. And he said to me,  These are they which came out of  great tribulation, and have  washed their robes, and made  them white in the blood of the  Lamb.  14. Preach the unvarnished word Mark 6:18-19 For John had said Say smooth things  of God to their worldly unto Herod, It is not lawful for (Isaiah 30:10)  detriment.  thee to have thy brother's wife.  Therefore Herodias had a quarrel  against him.  Beloved, I do not think I have this wrong. This is what the people of heaven look like. They have been mistreated and abused. 2Ch 36:16 But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against his people, till there was no remedy. If you haven't been checking off boxes as I read through that list you are going through the wrong gate, you are on the wrong path. Even if you could get to heaven, if you have not checked these boxes off you would have nothing in common and no 11  camaraderie with the people that are there. You know what happens when you don't have wedding garment on. These afflictions and the love of God are your wedding garments. While all of this is true, we also know that Christ's yoke is easy, and His burden is light (Mat. 11:30) so we have no complaints. Life and death is set before you ­ so choose life. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: That thou mayest love the LORD thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them. (Deut. 30:19-20.) I love you all. Amen. 12  
