Sunday, August 4, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  A Specimen of Certain Doom - Ignored. "Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7.) "Example" - only here, it means "Specimen" - unlike its usual meaning (a "Pattern" to go by), as at 1 Pet. 2:21: "because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps." See, Strong #1164 vs #5262.) This nuance is important. A "Specimen" is an integral part of a whole, taken as being representative of the whole, usually for the purpose of analysis and diagnosis. E.g., a sample ("Specimen") of tissue, blood, or urine. Ergo, God's dealings with Sodom and Gomorrha - in their totality - as revealed in Scripture - gives mankind a true and accurate "Specimen" of His dealings with the whole body of reprobate angels and men, from beginning to end - unchanged throughout all eternity.  What insane folly, then, for mankind to totally ignore - let alone fail to analyze with great diligence - this Specimen of Certain Doom. The subject commands diligent study. Gill: "And designs that detestable and unnatural sin, which, from these people, is called sodomy to this day; and which is an exceeding great sin, contrary to the light of nature and law of God, dishonorable to human nature, and scandalous to a nation and people, and commonly prevails where idolatry and infidelity do, as among the Papists and Muhammadans; and arose from idleness and fulness of bread in Sodom, and was committed in the sight of God, with great impudence; being destroyed by fire from heaven, and their cities turned into a sulphurous lake, which continues to this day, as a monument of God's vengeance upon all." "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince (i.e., confute, i.e, overwhelm with irrefutable argument) the gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision; whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucre's sake... Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth. Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. They profess that they know God; but in works they deny Him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate... Not purloining, but showing all good fidelity..." (Titus 1:9-2:10.) "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter." (Deut. 32:32.) Calvin: "He calls them an offshoot from the vine of Sodom and Gomorrah, inasmuch as they resemble in their nature both those nations, as much as if they had sprung from them." Clarke: "Their actions are gall and wormwood, producing nothing but mischief and misery to themselves and others. Their united exertions, as well as their individual acts, are sin, and only sin, continually. It is very likely that the grapes produced about the lake Asphaltites, where Sodom and Gomorrah formerly stood, were not only of an acrid, disagreeable taste, but of a deleterious (or deadly) quality." Matthew Henry: "They were planted a choice vine, wholly a right seed, but by sin had become the degenerate plant of a strange vine."  Sunday, August 4, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; how then are thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?" (Jer. 2:21.)  They not only transcribed the iniquity of Sodom, but outdid it. "As I live, saith the Lord God,  Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters." (Eze. 16:48.) God called them his vineyard, his pleasant plant. (Isa. 5:7.) But their  fruits were 1.) Very offensive, and displeasing to God, bitter as gall; and 2.) Very malignant, and  pernicious one to another, like the cruel venom of asps. That strange vine, was none other than the  United States of America and the world today. Nothing could be more contemptible than the  conduct of the United States murdering 1.3 million babies a year, and turning the government over  to the militant sodomites. Nothing could be more contemptible!  "And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and forever." (Isa. 59:20-21.)  The white horse, a magnificent war horse, is being prepared, even now. He's not some fancy show horse prancing around Tennessee, he is a war horse with his nostrils flaring. We don't want him  with a lot of fluff, we want him there winning that war! A war horse far more glorious then the war horses of the Assyrian army, of whom Lord Byron wrote: "And there lay the steed with his  nostril all wide, But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride; And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf, And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf." (The Destruction of  Sennacherib by Lord Byron) Unconditional surrender they call it!  "And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God; That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with their flesh." (Rev. 19:11-21.)  It is so exciting to think about the great battle of Armageddon that lies just ahead.  I love you. Amen.  
