Sunday, July 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  Bob Jones, the old southern preacher, often said, in my hearing, that this nation needs 50 Jonathan Edwards to survive. I say this nation needs one Elijah the Tishbite to survive. Let us examine it, and offer it to a hostile nation and world, rendering it impossible for this nation and this world to survive.  We at Westboro Baptist Church no longer offer repentance to this nation and this world. We call it the days of no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stoops for age; to wit: see the blue print that God left when he sent the Chaldees to deal with Judah, to wit: "Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the LORD. And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the LORD God of Israel. Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the LORD which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the LORD God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against his people, till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand." (2 Chr. 36:11-17.)  A small mystery, the wicked Zedekiah being the last king of Judah, and the northern kingdom having long entertained the wrath of God because of the satanic exploits of Ahab and Jezebel exemplified in the sad saga of Naboth and Jezreel. (Throughout the saga, bear in mind, that Ahab and Jezebel represent depraved human government whose conduct is highlighted for all the world to see by the conduct of Ahab and Jezebel.)  The outrageous manner in which King Ahab and Queen Jezebel dealt with the humble Naboth, when Naboth, on religious grounds refused to sell his modest vineyard to Ahab, to wit: the following reflects the divine historical account, written by the Holy Ghost of this outrageous episode, to wit: "And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria. And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house: and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money. And Naboth said to Ahab, The LORD forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto  Sunday, July 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  thee. And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the  word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I  will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down  upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread. But  Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy spirit so sad,  that thou eatest no bread? And he said unto her, Because I spake unto  Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money;  or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it: and he  answered, I will not give thee my vineyard. And Jezebel his wife said unto  him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread,  and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the  Jezreelite. So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his  seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were in  his city, dwelling with Naboth. And she wrote in the letters, saying,  Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people: And set two  men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou  didst blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him,  that he may die. And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles  who were the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them,  and as it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them. They  proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people. And there  came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of  Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the  people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they  carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died.  Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead. And it  came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was  dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of  Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money: for  Naboth is not alive, but dead. And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that  Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of  Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it. And the word of the LORD  came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of  Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth,  whither he is gone down to possess it. And thou shalt speak unto him,  saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession?  And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, In the place  where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even  thine. And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And  he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work  evil in the sight of the LORD. Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will  take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth  against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, And will make  thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the  house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou  hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin. And of Jezebel also  spake the LORD, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of  Jezreel. Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that  Sunday, July 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat. But there was none like  unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the  LORD, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up. And he did very abominably in  following idols, according to all things as did the Amorites, whom the  LORD cast out before the children of Israel." (1 Kings 21:1-26.)  It is the duty of every son of Adam to rise up against the likes of Ahab and Jezebel. But nobody, with the exception of Westboro Baptist Church and their humble people, preach against human government in our day. You have seen Jezebel and Ahab at work in their rebellion against God, and you have likewise seen their bloody end. Dogs came and licked their blood. Such an end is promised for all those who follow their pernicious ways and you may identify them by their cowardly conduct against the humble, such as Naboth. Make no mistake, Naboth provides us with a case study of human government's helpless victims. And what are you doing? How many Naboths must be destroyed and murdered by human government before you put away your idols and get about the business of serving God? The Lord God dispatched his favorite servant Elijah to show you the way. Just as you looked upon Ahab and Jezebel as God's everlasting examples of how the saints ought to live and war in this dispensation, even so, God has introduced us to his favorite servant Elijah the Tishbite, likening him to John the Baptist.  "Behold, I send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord;" (Mal. 4:5.)  "And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come? And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things. But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them." (Matt. 17:10-12.)  Beloved, I may be somewhat clumsy, but I think I see this matter as clear as a bell; to wit: we are very near the end of time, we are in the last of the last days, and Elijah has come and/or is come and nobody will question, except the damned. I believe that Westboro Baptist Church with her 43 registered members, constitutes Elijah, and I believe that Westboro Baptist Church has declared wholesale spiritual warfare against all the balance of mankind to date.  In Ahab and Jezebel, you have seen the conduct of human government down to this present age of mankind, to today. Are you listening Mr. President? I'm talking to you! You said if one of your daughters gets pregnant, you will kill the baby. Yes, you have spent millions of dollars killing millions of babies. This is a nation of bloody, murderous, filthy Sodomites; a nation of back-slidden, idol worshipers; a nation of bloody flag worshipers; a nation of vile, filthy same-sex marriage perverts, abiding under the wrath of Almighty God, and my people love to have it so. "The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God." (Ps. 9:17.) I love you. Amen.  
