Sunday, August 15, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  The Existence and The Attributes of God: "The fool hath said in his heart,  There is no God. They are corrupt; they have done abominable works; there is  none that doth good." Psa. 14:1. (Here, Beloved, in a word, is the doctrine of  Total Depravity. This psalm is a description of the deplorable corruption by  nature of every son of Adam, since the complete withering of that common root in the Garden of Eden.) "The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one." Psa. 14:2,3.  Thereupon, and beginning at Psalm 14:4, is an amazing statement of divine truth, that I have never seen properly expounded; to wit: "Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? WHO EAT UP MY PEOPLE AS THEY EAT BREAD, AND CALL NOT UPON THE LORD." Psa. 14:4. First, nail it down: When you see the expression, "workers of iniquity," the Holy Ghost is ALWAYS referring to the Non-Elect. ALWAYS. The declaration here is, that the first evidence of Total Depravity and Non-Election is that the reprobate sinner makes it the first order of his Satanic business to persecute the Elect; and the second characteristic of such Hell-bound beasts is that they refuse to call upon the Lord, but rather chose to worship idols and devils; to wit (read carefully and prayerfully): "Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord." Psa. 14:4. And then comes another shocker in Psalm 14:5; to wit: "There were they in great fear; for God is in the generation of the righteous." Psa. 14:5. Having engaged in dastardly and outrageous persecution of the Elect without the least cause or justification, the Non-Elect are now afraid of ominous repercussions from the Almighty. God has put His fear and dread in them; to wit: "This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee." (Dt. 2:25) "Great is our Lord, and of great Power; his Understanding is infinite. (Power and Understanding being two more of His Attributes)." Psa. 147:5. The wondrous saga and testimony of Rahab the Harlot is an example of how God works on the hearts and minds of His and His saints' enemies; to wit: "And she (Rahab) said unto the men, I know that the Lord hath given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you. For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed. And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you; for the Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath." Jos. 2:9-11.  We come now to talk of the Immutability of God (i.e., the utter Changelessness of God); which is that glorious attribute of God without which all the other attributes might be precarious: "Life, death and Hell, and world's unknown, Hang on His firm decree; He sits on no precarious throne, Nor borrows leave to be." (From Dr. Watts' Lyric Poems.) We must have an unchangeable Savior; even, "Jesus Christ, the same, yesterday, and today, and for ever." Heb. 13:8. In fact, we must have a God and Savior who is free from even the least suspicion of the slightest shadow of change; to wit: "Do not err, my beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, WITH WHOM IS NO VARIABLENESS, NEITHER SHADOW OF TURNING." Jas. 1:16,17. Again, there is a strong line of verses to the effect that, "The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them." Dt. 33:27.  Sunday, August 15, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Now consider the case, Beloved, if God in all His Attributes were not eternal, and His mighty arms that bear us up and support us in every way all our days ­ I say, if those arms were not everlasting ­ that if, IF, out in eternity, after a few million years in Heaven; God decided to renege on His  glorious Covenant of Grace, like some bankrupt pension fund, leaving old-age pensioners high and  dry and bankrupt in their old age. And what about the much-vaunted love of God that we thought was eternal ­ should suddenly expire ­ like some tired, disappointed, unfaithful husband or wife. I'm sure you take my meaning, Beloved. If God were not Immutable, His other glorious Attributes  might crumble with the passage of time, as being, inevitably, PRECARIOUS. We, sadly, might have to change Dr. Watts' Hymn; to wit: "God sits on a precarious throne, and borrows leave to be." But, thankfully, they that know their God will be strong and do exploits. God is IMMUTABLE ­ (i.e., ABSOLUTELY CHANGELESS) ­ as the following example of Holy Writ  clearly proves; to wit:  "They shall perish, but thou shalt endure; yea, all of them shall wax old as a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end." (Psa. 102:26,27) Now we next come to discuss the POWER of God ­ that incomprehensible Attribute of God which, after all is said and done, remains for the most part shrouded in mystery. A lofty declaration of this divine POWER may be found from the lips of wise Job; to wit: "Lo, these are parts of his ways; but how little a portion is heard of him? but the THUNDER OF HIS POWER who can understand?" Job 26:14. Job is saying here that mortal man understands only a tiny fraction of the available knowledge about God's POWER. Indeed, King David ascribes all power unto God, and suggests that none but God either has POWER or the ability to exercise POWER; to wit: "God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this; that POWER BELONGETH UNTO GOD." Psa. 62:11. Our Lord Jesus Christ firmly ratified King David's declaration as to God's POWER, and thereupon pledged the full and free use thereof to His Gospel preachers to the end of the world; to wit:  "ALL POWER is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen." (Mat. 28:18-20)  Here the omnipotent (i.e., the ALL-POWERFUL) Savior pledges His OMNIPOTENCE behind the infinite, world-wide, eventual success of genuine Gospel preaching. In his 800-page authoritative book, entitled "The Existence and Attributes of God," Stephen Charnock (1628-1680) argues that what is NOT said about the POWER of God ­ but is only hinted at ­ establishes infinitely more POWER in the Godhead than if all were plainly said. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handywork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard." Psa. 19:1-3. But those are only small parts of His ways, declares Job; but how little a portion of His POWER is heard; but the THUNDER (the massiveness) OF HIS POWER, who can understand? Job 26:14.  Charnock: "Who can understand? Who is able to count all the monuments of His POWER? How does this little which I have spoken of" ­ (i.e., in his 800-page book!) ­ "exceed the capacity of our understanding, and is rather the matter of our astonishment than the object of our comprehensive knowledge? The POWER of the greatest potentate or the mightiest creature is but of small extent; none but have their limits; it may be understood how far they can act, in what sphere their activity is bounded; but when I have spoken all of divine power that I can; when you have thought all that you can think of it, your souls will prompt you to conceive something more,  Sunday, August 15, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  beyond what I have spoken and what you have thought. His POWER shines in everything, and is  beyond everything. There is infinite more POWER lodged in His nature, not expressed to the  world. The understanding of men and angels centered in one creature, would fall short of the  perception of the infiniteness of it. All that can be comprehended of it are but little fringes of it, a small portion. No man ever discoursed, or can, of God's POWER according to the magnificence of  it. No creature can conceive it; God Himself only comprehends it, God Himself only is able to express it. Man's power being limited, his line is too short to measure the incomprehensible omnipotence of God: "The THUNDER of his POWER WHO CAN UNDERSTAND?" Job 26:14. Answer? NONE CAN (!)"  "And God created GREAT WHALES, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind; and God saw that it was good." (Gen. 1:21)  "Lo, those are parts of his ways; but how little a portion is heard of him." (Job 26:14)  Now take matters more profoundly spiritual and eternal, created and sustained by His POWER, such as Heaven and Hell; to wit: "Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He stretcheth out the north over the empty space, and hangeth the earth upon nothing. ... The pillars of Heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof. ...By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed the crooked serpent." Job 26:6,7,11,13. This is but a small sampling of some of His works of POWER; more glorious things are within his secret dwelling chambers and palaces.  Though those things mentioned in this brief sermon argue a stupendous POWER of the Creator in his works of creation and providence, yet they are nothing to what may be DECLARED of His POWER. And what may be DECLARED is nothing to what may be CONCEIVED; and what may be CONCEIVED, is nothing to what is ABOVE THE CONCEPTIONS OF ANY CREATURE. These are but little crumbs and fragments of that infinite POWER which is in His nature, like a drop in comparison of the mighty ocean; a whisper in comparison of a mighty voice of thunder. INFINITE and INCOMPREHENSIBLE POWER pertains to the nature of God, and is expressed in part in His works; or, though there be a mighty expression of divine POWER in His works (storms, floods, earthquakes, etc.), yet an INCOMPREHENSIBLE POWER pertains to His nature. His POWER glitters in all His works, as well as His WISDOM, KNOWLEDGE, UNDERSTANDING, AND OMNIPRESENCE.  WISDOM: "To God only WISE, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen." Rom. 16:27. "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only WISE God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen." 1 Tim. 1:17. KNOWLEDGE: "And of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and KNOWLEDGE." Col. 2:3. "He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man KNOWLEDGE, shall not he know?" Psa. 94:10. UNDERSTANDING: "Great is our Lord, and of great power; his UNDERSTANDING is infinite." Psa. 147:5. "He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his UNDERSTANDING." Jer. 51:15. OMNIPRESENCE: "Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the Lord; do I not fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord." Jer. 23:24. "Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but ALL THINGS are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." Heb. 4:13. "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy." (Isa. 57:15)  Sunday, August 15, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  God is essentially everywhere present in Heaven and in earth and in Hell; and this Attribute ­  called the OMNIPRESENCE of God ­ is exceedingly precious to God's Elect; and is exceedingly  terrifying to the non-Elect.  The old theologians in their so-called Confessions of Faith would word it as follows; to wit: "If God be, He must be somewhere; for that which is nowhere is nothing. Since God is, He is in the world; but not in ONE PART of the world; for then He were circumscribed by it. If in the world, and only there, though it be a great space, He were also limited. Some therefore said, God is everywhere, and nowhere. Nowhere; i.e., not bounded by any place, nor receiving from any place anything for his preservation or sustainment. He is everywhere, because no creature, either body or spirit, can exclude the presence of his essence; for he is not only near, but in everything;" to wit:  "For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring." (Acts 17:28)  "For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and for him; And he is before all things, and by him all things consist (or, cohere, hold together)." (Col. 1:16,17)  "Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1:2,3)  Never in the literature of mankind has there been a clearer exposition of The OMNIPRESENCE of God than that of King David in the 139th Psalm; to wit: "O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off. Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether. Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in Hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. For thou hast possessed my reins; thou hast covered me in my mother's womb. I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members were written. ... How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them. (More numerous than the sand.) ... Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts; And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting." (Psa. 139:1-24) I love you.  Amen.  
