Sunday, July 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life; he that  believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and  whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest  thou this?" John 11:25,26. "Oh that my words were now written!  oh that they were printed in a book! That they were graven with an  iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!" Job 19:23,24. "For I know  that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day  upon the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this body,  yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself, and  mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be  consumed within me." Job 19:25-27. "But ye should say, Why  persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me? Be  ye afraid of the sword; for wrath bringeth the punishments of the  sword, that ye may know there is a judgment." Job 19:28,29.  Beloved, the resurrection of the human body from the dead in a glorified, immortal, impassible, incorruptible, powerful, beautiful (or, handsome) body ­ NO IFS, ANDS, OR BUTS ABOUT IT ­ is the sine qua non of our faith. Without which, nothing. Exactly what Paul meant when he said, "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all (God's Elect) die, even so in Christ shall all (God's Elect) be made alive." 1 Cor. 15:19-22. Even so, all God's Elect are eager and anxious to know as much about their final resurrection and the true nature of their glorified bodies as possible and as it has pleased God to reveal unto us in His Word. "For our conversation (i.e., citizenship) is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile body (i.e., the body of our humiliation), that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself." (Phil. 3:20,21)  Beloved, this is the "ROOT OF THE MATTER," referred to by Job at Job 19:28. Human knowledge, even sanctified human knowledge, is in this life very, very skimpy, at best. And such as it is, Paul says, is soon to "vanish away;" to wit: "Whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part (i.e., skimpily), and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away." (1 Cor. 13:8-10)  The sense is, that our new bodies come equipped with a magnificent new brain to match ­ chuck full of holy knowledge. But, even so, the utmost totality of the quantity of our knowledge has been compared to a mere drop of the existing ocean of available knowledge on earth; which said ocean is itself a mere pittance of knowledge compared to that knowledge which is immediately available to us upon our arrival in Heaven in our new and glorified bodies.  Our drop of knowledge will be engulfed by the ocean of knowledge which we shall spend eternity happily getting our celestial arms around. And, of course, the knowledge of God is infinite, and is infinitely beyond and above our poor capacity ever to grasp or attain to; to wit:  Sunday, July 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God (!) how  unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out... For of him, and  through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be glory for ever."  (Rom. 11:33,36)  Thus, you see, that we must stand in awe of the majesty and infinitude of God and his attributes; and we should join the humble prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ to the Father, "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." Lk. 10:21. Therein, the Lord Jesus is thanking the Father for revealing ­ (i.e., for imparting otherwise hidden knowledge of) ­ "these things" to His chosen ones; and He elsewhere and often taught and preached about the Kingdom of God in obscure speech (parables, similitudes), thereby to hide knowledge from the reprobates (the non-Elect), and reveal knowledge to His disciples. See, Mat. 13:10-11.  Beloved, look around you. Is not our society in 2009 AD totally and abysmally ignorant of the things of God? Last week there came another prestigious editorial ­ this one from the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, entitled "Pastor who espouses hate wins a round." This thing was posted to thousands of additional media outlets, many of which carried it, to potentially millions of people. It starts right out on the first line of the first paragraph; to wit: "Both Thomas Jefferson and the 18th-century French philosopher Voltaire, from whom Jefferson borrowed many of his ideas, are given credit for the memorable phrase, `I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it.' Actually it may have been one of Voltaire's biographers, but never mind. The point is, NONE OF THEM EVER MET FRED PHELPS." The editorial continues paragraph after paragraph ­ professional lie after professional lie. While giving lip-service to the First Amendment, the writer urges the passage of laws denying First Amendment rights to the Westboro Baptist Church.  Meanwhile the writer urges the courts to deny First Amendment rights and protection by the cute device of creating a new crime or tort called "hate speech," and declaring that the pure Gospel preaching which has gone forth from this church ­ without interruption for nearly 50 years ­ is now a crime or a tort. Then, after the customary vilification of her pastor, the editorial ends with these words; to wit: "There are ways to guarantee free speech without licensing hate speech. We trust the courts will find them." That, Beloved, is the typical Satanic sophistry that we are slandered with day in, day out, and which is PERSECUTION of the rankest sort, and which we gladly endure for the cause of God and truth in the earth in these last of the last days; all of which is proof that this ministry is of God, not of man. But to our Satanic detractors, we give you the same ADVICE and COMMINATION that the patriarch Job gave to his detractors; to wit: "But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me? Be ye afraid of the sword; for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment." (Job 19:28,29)  Verse 28 contains the ADVICE, and verse 29 contains the COMMINATION. In the first place, WBC has the absolutely undoubted right, and the holy, solemn duty, to preach God's Word to every segment and to every individual of this sick, evil, Hell-bound world's entire population; to wit: "And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." (Mk. 16:15) "These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee." (Tit. 2:15)  Sunday, July 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their  transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." (Isa. 58:1)  "Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations." (Ezek. 16:1,2)  "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine." (2 Tim. 4:1,2)  Old John Wesley once said, "The world is my parish." WBC has a message straight from the Almighty, and we also say, "The world is our parish." It is a thing of supreme irrelevancy to us whether this or that man wants us to preach to him. The Savior said "every creature." It is likewise irrelevant that this or that city or nation bans us or proclaims us persona non grata. The Savior said "every creature." We are, however, now, at this hour, delivering to the nations of peoples of the earth a message from the Lord God of Heaven ­ a sacred message of solemn ADVICE and COMMINATION. For the past 18+ years you have vilified, slandered, marginalized and demonized WBC ­ universally ­ to the utmost extent of your powers ­ and solely because of our Gospel preaching. You should understand, that according to the Scriptures, your malicious conduct is the worst form of the sin of PERSECUTION. You may see the gravity of that sin and your participation in it from such passages as the following; to wit: "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell? Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and PERSECUTE them from city to city." (Mat. 23:33,34) "Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have PERSECUTED me, they will also PERSECUTE you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also." (Jn. 15:20)  For some ten separate rounds of debate, Job's detractors reproached and "broke [Job] in pieces with words," (Job 19:2), accusing him of the vilest offences against God and man; until Job pled with them in the most pathetic way; to wit: "Have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me." Job 19:21. To no avail. Their persecution of Job through lies and slander against him continued unabated. This also is certainly the case with Westboro Baptist Church. With full knowledge of the well-documented truth, the media and all other segments of society, around the world, continue to vilify WBC. (E.g., the BBC documentary, "The Most Hated Family in America," or, the world.)  At length, in a good faith attempt to satisfy the outrageous and false allegations against him, Job lifted his voice in an impassioned plea. He tells his detractors that he would be willing to have his words of truth engraved in stone, thereby demonstrating his sincerity as to the soundness and orthodoxy of his position; and thereby demonstrating the continuing irrational nature of the persecution of righteous Job when they turned down his offer out of hand. Job cries out: "Why do ye PERSECUTE me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book! That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!" (Job 19:22-24)  Thereupon Job delivers his mighty confession of faith ­ in concise form ­ whereby he shows to all the world and to all succeeding generations ­ and especially to his polished, malevolent detractors ­ that "the root of the matter" is found in Job ­ and that they PERSECUTE God's Elect at their eternal peril; to wit: "I know that my Redeemer liveth," ­ (i.e., my Goel, my  Sunday, July 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Kinsman-Redeemer, my Avenger of blood, who doth pursue and destroy in retaliatory vengeance  all who persecute me), "and that he shall stand at the latter day upon (or over) the earth;" ­  (i.e., my mighty avenger will out-stand all other powers and voices and arguments, having  destroyed them all) ­ "And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh" ­  (i.e., in my resurrected, glorified body) ­ "shall I see God; Whom I shall see for myself, and  mine eyes shall behold, and not another;" ­ (i.e., Caryl: "I shall see Him as a friend to me, as  He that will take my part, and give sentence on my side."); ­ "though my reins be consumed  within me." ­ (i.e., skin destroyed by worms without, now to the internal organs and parts (the  viscera) within; until not one particle remains of the mortal body; it makes no difference); "I  know that my Redeemer liveth," and faith seizes upon His promise, "Because I live, ye shall live  also." Jn. 14:19.  Ever and anon the eloquent words of the old Methodist preacher, Elbert Munsey, come to my mind, something like this: to wit: "Though your bones lie bleaching at the bottom of the sea, or, fossilized, lie deeply imbedded in some rock; and though your flesh, long since turned to dust, be scattered over the continents, transmuted into plants, transfused into animals ­ God's power is able to raise you up from the dead, and it is pledged to do so." That (!) cries out the suffering, yet triumphant, Job to his merciless persecutors, is "the root of the matter!!!" And unless you three blind mice are deaf and dumb as well as blind, you will recognize and admit that "the root of the matter is found in me." Job 19:28.  Thereupon, Job, in a heat, blasts his persecutors, much as we at WBC do now under similar circumstances. Job says, first I will give you some sound ADVICE; and if you have a lick of sense you will heed it; to wit: "But ye should say, Why PERSECUTE we him?" So do we advise this sea of insane persecutors all about us. Everybody knows why you persecute WBC. It's because of our Gospel message that we have saturated the world with: God hates you, and you are on your way, irreversibly, to Hell.  Listen up, America, in persecuting us you are pouring gasoline on the blazing hot fires of God's wrath. You should forthwith stop your madness. Caryl: "Ye should say, it is your duty to say, I exhort or advise you to say, `Why do we persecute him?' It is but time that you should now recollect your selves, and be in a better mind; that your hearts should smite you for what you have done, and that you should put this question home to your own souls, `Why have we thus far troubled him? Or, why should we trouble him any further?'"  In verse 28, Job advises his persecutors to immediately stop persecuting him. In verse 29, he warns them that God will destroy them and send them to Hell if they don't. The old preachers call this a COMMINATION, which means a formal denunciation, or, threatened vengeance; to wit: "Be ye afraid of the sword; for (God's) wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment." (Job 19:28,29)  In like manner, we are warning America, the UK, Canada, Australia, Europe, South America, Africa, Asia, and the isles of the sea; you had better quit persecuting WBC for preaching the Gospel to you. There is no greater sin. We cry unto God day and night for His vengeance to fall upon you; to wit: "And shall not God avenge His own Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though He bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily." (Lk. 18:7,8) I love you.  Amen.  
