Sunday, May 6, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of  things not seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report. Through  faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God,  so that things which are seen were not made of things which do  appear. But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that  cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of  them that diligently seek Him. By faith Noah, being warned of God of  things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the  saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and  became heir of the righteousness which is by faith." (Heb. 11:1-7.)  For 600 years Noah preached righteousness to the sodomitical antediluvian world (before the Flood); and things only got worse and worse; to wit: "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that He had made man on the earth, and it grieved Him at His heart. And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them." (Gen. 6:5-7) Whereupon the Lord purposed to destroy the old world and all therein; and announced His purpose to Noah; to wit: "And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an ark of gopher wood." (Gen. 6:13-14) "And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die." (Gen. 6:17) "Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he." (Gen. 6:22)  This would be a good place to remind ourselves again of the simple, magnificent rule that governed Noah's life of faith ­ never losing sight of the fact that Noah's faith was a supernatural faith, miraculously implanted in Noah's heart by the Holy Ghost; to wit: "But without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith." (Heb. 11:6,7.)  Beloved, these things happened to Noah for our examples, and were preserved for our learning upon whom the ends of the ages are come. Said another way, by the Holy Ghost: to wit: "For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Now the God of patience and consolation (comfort) grant you to be likeminded one toward another according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with ONE MIND and ONE MOUTH glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God." (Rom. 15:4-7.)  Next to the Creation, the Flood of Noah is the greatest event in the history of our earth. Nothing comparable with it has happened since ­ nor will happen ­ until the final destruction of this universe in the fire of Judgment Day.  Sunday, May 6, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  The Flood marks the end of a world of transcendent beauty, created by God as a perfect living place  for man, and the beginning of a new world, a mere shadowy replica of its original glory. In all  recorded history there is no other event except the Fall of Adam which has had such a revolutionary  effect upon the topography (skyline) and condition of this earth and which has so profoundly  affected human history and every phase of life as it now exists in its manifold forms in the world. No geologist, (study of earth's surface, substances and distribution of same), biologist, or student of  history can afford to ignore this great catastrophe (i.e., the Flood). Listen to the sacred account: to  wit:  "And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him; and the Lord shut him in. And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth. And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters. And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and EVERY MAN; ALL IN WHOSE NOSTRILS WAS THE BREATH OF LIFE, OF ALL THAT WAS IN THE DRY LAND, DIED. AND EVERY LIVING SUBSTANCE WAS DESTROYED WHICH WAS UPON THE FACE OF THE GROUND, BOTH MAN, AND CATTLE, AND THE CREEPING THINGS, AND THE FOWL OF THE HEAVEN; AND THEY WERE DESTROYED FROM THE EARTH; AND NOAH ONLY REMAINED ALIVE, AND THEY THAT WERE WITH HIM IN THE ARK. And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days." (Gen. 7:16-24)  Beloved, the Flood mockers and scoffers occupy exalted seats of the scornful in our institutions of higher learning ­ but only for the past 200 years or so, when these jerks suddenly got wiser than God, and began to deny the Bible account of the Flood. Those men ­ let there be no doubt ­ have thereby bought themselves a one-way ticket to Hell. They hate and heap contempt upon a sovereign God, His Word, His Church, and His People. After all, the Flood was a prototype of the Final Judgment, which will make a sudden and fearful end of the Second World. The Lord says: "As the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. For as in the days that were before the Flood (i.e., the Antediluvian World), they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and knew not until the Flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matt. 24:37-39.) As the first world (Adam's world) perished by water, so this present world shall be destroyed by fire. (2 Pet. 3:3-6.) And as this second world emerged from the Flood, stripped of its original glory, so shall emerge from the fire of judgment, a new heaven and a new earth cleansed of sin and all evil, of misery, war, and death, and restored to a perfection which shall transcend even its original glory. (2 Pet. 3:13.) Beloved, a study of the Flood ought to be an ongoing exercise, for in this awful catastrophe we behold our God in His wonderful and fearful majesty as He deals in His anger and mercy with the children of men.  Beloved. Think of it. Within a few weeks, some twelve to sixteen billion souls were snuffed out into Hell fire and brimstone ­ without hope and without God in the hostile universe. Where is the divine love and unconditional compassion that you mercy mongers constantly yap about? If you want to know the truth of God about the everlasting doctrines of grace, you must study the Flood. If you want to know the truth about Heaven and Hell, Sin and Righteousness, the Second Coming of Christ in Power and Glory; and, the Great White Throne ­ etc. ­ then you must study the Flood.  Sunday, May 6, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  Always bearing in mind that we are dealing here with a very great miracle of God, and the condign wrath of God. There is a unique passage at 1 Pet. 3:18-22, that tells us that while the ark was being built ­ 120 years ­ our dear Lord Jesus was busy preaching to the antediluvian masses, warning them that the universal Flood was on the way and would destroy them all. Think of it, Beloved. It is utterly reasonable to conclude that Noah, who was called a "preacher of righteousness," was complementing the Saviour's warnings with details of the ark and the forthcoming Flood; to wit: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; by which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Pet. 3:18-20) "And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly." (2 Pet. 2:5) These two passages of Holy Scriptures from 1st and 2nd Peter ­ taken together ­ will support a free translation that in turn throws considerable light upon the shadowy world of the perverted Antediluvians. First, nail it down, according to the Babylonian Talmud, not only did those filthy, lawless people practice worldwide sodomy, but the thing that triggered the Flood was the final adoption of worldwide same-sex marriage (here just remember the letter from the Australian Ken Hood, where Hood started off his letter to the editor of the Capital-Journal by saying that the Westboro Baptist Church may be on the right track after all about the homosexual menace).  Next, Peter says that our Saviour was put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Holy Spirit, by which Holy Spirit our blessed Saviour went and preached to the Antediluvian slaves to sodomite sin ­ for at least 120 years. The prison mentioned where He went and preached to filthy sodomite spirits are the fetters which bind every sodomite in the world to cords of depraved lust; to wit: "And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will." (2 Tim. 2:26)  NOTE: As an aside, it must be noted that the prophet Enoch, the seventh from Adam, and who walked with God and was not for God took him ­ I say, Enoch had a son, Methuselah, who was the oldest man who ever lived (969). When Methuselah was born, and under a spirit of prophesy, his name signified that when he was born the Flood would come. Indeed his name carries in it a prediction that so it must be; that Enoch being a prophet gave him his name under a spirit of prophesy, foretelling by it when the Flood should be; for his name signifies WHEN HE DIES THERE SHALL BE AN EMISSION, or "a sending forth of waters upon the earth, to destroy it." The eastern writers are unanimous that he died before the Flood. The Arabic writers are very particular as to the time in which he died; they say he died in the sixth hundredth year of Noah, on a Friday, about noon; and Noah and Shem buried him, embalmed in spices.  Thus you see, Beloved, that several of the pious patriarchs and their families were probably available to fellowship with and assist Noah and his family with funds and labour, in the building of the Ark ­ but had died off by the time launching time came ­ Methuselah bringing up the rear, so to speak, literally dying on the loading ramp. Remember the holy oracle: WHEN HE DIES THERE SHALL BE AN EMISSION (Flood waters sufficient to destroy the earth).  After all preparations had been completed, and Noah and his family had entered the ark, the storm broke, and there followed the most destructive catastrophe this world has ever experienced ­ or will experience ­ until heaven and earth shall pass away on the day of final judgment.  Sunday, May 6, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  The record of this event is given in simple language, terse and majestic. The account reads like a logbook of a sea captain, and it is quite possible that Noah did, actually, record from day to day the events here related. The account reads as follows: "In the 600th year of Noah's life, on the 17th day of the second month, on that very day, the fountains of the great deep were all broken open, and the windows of the heavens were opened (sheets of rain fell on earth forty days and nights). That same day Noah with Shem, Ham, and Japheth, Noah's sons, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons, went into the ark, together with all the various kinds of wild beasts, domestic animals, land reptiles, birds; and of all creatures in which there was the breath of life, a pair of each, joined Noah in the ark. Those that entered were a male and a female of every kind of animal, as God had commanded him. Then the Lord shut him in. The flood continued for forty days upon the earth. The waters mounted and lifted the ark so that it rose above the earth. The waters rose and increased greatly on the earth, so that the ark floated on the surface of the waters. The waters rose higher and higher on the earth, until the highest mountains everywhere under the heavens were all covered. Fifteen cubits above them the waters rose, so that the mountains were covered. Every creature that moved on the earth perished, including birds, domestic animals, wild beasts, all the land reptiles, and all mankind. Of all that was on the land, everything in whose nostrils was the breath of life, died. Every living thing was blotted off the face of the earth, both men and animals; and reptiles and birds, they were blotted off the earth, so that Noah alone was left, and those that were with him in the ark. The waters rose on the earth for 150 days."  There is a majestic awfulness and awe-inspiring solemnity about this picture. There is nothing here of the trivial or the spectacular, nothing to arouse the carnal sympathies for those men, women and children that perished in this fearful destruction. We see nothing of the death struggle; we hear not the cry of despair; we are not called upon to witness the frantic agonies of husband and wife, of parent and child, as they flee in terror before the rising waters, climbing from hilltop and to ever greater heights, only to be pursued even there by a remorseless foe until they all perished. Nor is a word said of the sadness of those who are safe within the ark, looking out upon the destruction that was wrought all about them.  The Babylonian version differs here. Tears are shed in heaven over this catastrophe; and even consternation seizes upon the heavenly inhabitants, while within the ark itself, a distraught Noah is depicted as saying: "When the storm came to an end and the terrible water spouts ceased, I opened the window and the light smote upon my face; I looked at the sea, tentatively observing, and the whole humanity had returned to mud. Like seaweed the corpses floated. I was seized with sadness; I sat down and wept, and my tears fell upon my face." Well, Beloved, there is something bad wrong with any of God's Elect doing anything but rejoicing at the destruction of the wicked. Those evil Antediluvian sinners brought down the wrath of God largely by the way they mistreated us ­ and I'm supposed to grieve when our Father commences to punish them as only He can? I mean, have you heretics never heard of imprecatory prayers?  Westboro Baptist Church has read Psa. 58, which says that we should rejoice and wipe our feet in the blood of the wicked, "so that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth." (Psa. 58:10,11.)  "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her." (Rev. 18:20)  I love you. Amen.  
