Sunday, September 26, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "By faith he (Moses) kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he  that destroyed the first-born should touch them; (or, that sprinkling of blood,  that the Destroyer of the first-born should not touch them.)" Heb. 11:28.  It would not be proper to say, he kept the sprinkling of blood. The word "kept" would be better translated "wrought," or, "performed." Moses "wrought," he "performed" the whole sacred duty involved with keeping the Passover; that is, he killed the Lamb and sprinkled the blood. Which merged into the Lords Supper, and is of huge mystical or typical signification. Moses received the details of the Passover directly from God, as one of only two ordinances of the New Testament Church; the other one being believers Baptism. Three powerful and precious events came to pass on the night of the institution of the first Passover; to wit: 1) the death of the firstborn of every family in Egypt; 2) the exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt; and, 3) the hasty celebration of the first Passover as the most glorious type of our dear Lord Jesus in all the Word of God; to wit:  "For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us; Therefore let us keep the feast (i.e., the Lord's Supper), not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." (1 Cor. 5:7,8)  The death of the all the firstborn in the land of Egypt was truly a devastating "plague" to top all devastating plagues. Having dealt in utmost bad faith with Moses and Aaron throughout ten tedious plagues ­ characterized by on-again, off-again negotiations ­ all of which ended in failure due to the hardening of Pharaohs cursed heart; I say, after all that, the tyrant was ripe for judgment.  "And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards HE WILL LET YOU GO HENCE: WHEN HE SHALL LET YOU GO, HE SHALL SURELY THRUST YOU OUT HENCE ALTOGETHER. ... And Moses said, Thus saith the Lord, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt; And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts." (Ex. 11:1,4,5)  Beloved, an announcement like that from the Lord Himself, under the circumstances of that case, most surely portended the gravest of fates for the entire nation of Egypt. And, I might say, that something of the same fate awaits the American nation, England, Canada, Australia, Sweden, the nations of Europe, and all other nations to whom WBC has preached and issued prophetic warnings ­ only to be banned and mistreated by governmental action, whereby they "frame mischief by a law." Psa. 94:20. The enmity against WBC is international in scope. Hence, Gods wrath is international in scope. If fallen man has any unselfish sentiments whatsoever, they are usually tied to his children. Ten horrendous plagues ­ one after the other ­ were visited upon Egypt ­ to no effect. But see what happens when the Lord God killed every firstborn child in Egypt; to wit:  "Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards HE WILL LET YOU GO. ... And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die. ... And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more." (Ex. 11:1,5-6)  On a much smaller scale, the little nation of perverts known as Sweden had much the same experience when a tsunami swept through Southeast Asia, and killed several thousand vacationing Swedes. There was scarcely a single house where someone was not shipped home dead, and the news reported that virtually all Swedish homes had grief and mourning. Now for Egypts night of unspeakable sorrow; to wit:  Sunday, September 26, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  "For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in  the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will  execute judgment; I am the Lord." (Ex. 12:12)  Remember our text, as now freely translated; to wit: By faith Moses wrought, or performed, the whole complicated sacred duty involved with keeping the passover; i.e., he killed the lamb and sprinkled the blood (together with observing all the other requirements involved in keeping the passover), all because he feared, "lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them." Heb. 11:28. Careful attention must be paid to the complicated keeping of the passover ­ just as care must be given to keeping the heart with all diligence when observing the service of the Lords Supper; to wit: "For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body." (1 Cor. 11:26-29) (Note: I believe that the key to rightly dividing this word of truth is found in this clause: "not discerning the Lords body." The Lords body is the New Testament church, the only body on earth with authority to administer the Lords Supper or Water Baptism. One must locate and join and make peace with and walk orderly among, that blessed body on earth, which is to rightly discern the Lords body. There will be no Arminian swill or other forms of leaven there ­ or crackers and warm spit (grape juice) at the table ­ only unleavened bread and wine. "Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." 1Cor. 5:7,8.)  Comes now the "one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt," that God had promised Moses, after which, said the Lord, Pharaoh, will not only let you go, but he will drive you out of Egypt with an urgency that will wake everybody up in the middle of the night, and get a nation of three million rich Jews hustling down the highway, dressing and eating on the run, with pockets full of Egyptians wealth to warm the cockles of their hearts on the trip. "And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the Land of Egypt, saying," ­ (in effect, change the calendar, an earthshaking episode is about to take place that will alter the course of human history) ­ "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you. Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house; (now note the minutest of detail), And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbor next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb. Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year; ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats." Ex. 12:1-5.  (Note: More complexities attending instructions which must be followed at the peril of death of the firstborn in the household ­ possibly! It is clear that the lamb must be without blemish, and it is clear what the signification of the spotless lamb is intended; to wit: "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, AS OF A LAMB WITHOUT BLEMISH AND WITHOUT SPOT. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you, Who by him do  Sunday, September 26, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God." 1 Pet. 1:18-21.)  So, the lamb being a male of the first year and taken from the sheep may be clear enough, as a type of Christ. But what about the goats? None of the commentators handle the goats very well. It is difficult to see how a goat can be a type of Christ. But there it is; to wit: "Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year; ye shall take it out from the sheep, OR FROM THE GOATS." Ex. 12:5. Usually, sheep are typical of Gods Elect, and goats symbolize Hell-bound Reprobates; to wit: "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; and before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats; and he shall set the sheep upon his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. ... Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels (i.e., messengers). ... And these shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal." (Mat. 25:31-34,41,46) Schaff-Herzog: "Along with sheep, the goat is also raised in many districts, being more numerous than sheep, especially in mountainous and arid regions, since it thrives, where sheep can hardly be sustained, climbing along the steepest precipices where no sheep can range. In the Old Testament, the goat is frequently embraced along with the sheep under the common designation ,,zon (ut sup.)." Gill: "The goat being of an ill smell may denote Christ being made sin, and a sinoffering for His people." John Trapp: "From the sheep, or from the goats. A lamb to show Christ's innocency, meekness, patience, profitableness. Or a kid, to show He was a sinner: (1.) By imputation, for the Lord laid on Him our iniquities, Isa. 53:6; and, (2.) By reputation, for ,,He made His grave with the wicked. Isa. 53:9."  Like all the other heroes of the faith identified in the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, Moses made his calling and election sure ­ (see, 2 Pet. 1:10 ­ "Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure;") ­ by certain acts which he performed "by faith," (i.e., by supernatural, saving faith) while alive on the earth; to wit: "Through faith he..." 1.) kept the passover, and 2.) the sprinkling of blood, (Heb. 11:28). He carefully killed the Lamb, and sprinkled the blood, for fear of the Destroying Angel; to wit: "lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them." Heb. 11:28. WHO DID HE MEAN BY "THEM?" Remember, beloved, Moses may have been a firstborn male himself, or Aaron, Moses brother; to wit: "And the name of Amrams wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt; and she bare unto Amram, Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister." Num. 26:59. Thus we know that the father of Moses was Amram, and the mother of Moses was Jochebed. And it is certain that the firstborn son of Moses was Gershom; to wit: "And Moses was content to dwell with the man; and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter. AND SHE BARE HIM A SON, AND HE CALLED HIS NAME GERSHOM; for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land." Ex. 2:21,22.  So you see, Beloved, that just as Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, by faith, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; (Heb. 11:7); even so Moses, believed God in every detail concerning the keeping of the Passover and the Sprinkling of the blood, moved with fear of the death of the firstborn in every house; ergo:  Sunday, September 26, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, LEST HE THAT DESTROYED THE FIRSTBORN SHOULD TOUCH THEM." (Heb. 11:28)  And, just as Noahs preaching of righteousness throughout his 120-year ark-building project, "by  the which he condemned the world (ala America is Doomed, and the World is Doomed), and became heir of the righteousness which is BY FAITH (i.e., imputed, supernatural, saving faith);" Even so the similar faith and resulting faith-driven conduct of Moses "condemned the world" of  his and every subsequent day, sine die. Now you see why with such care the Lord Jesus and His disciples made ready the last Passover and the first Lords Supper; to wit:  "And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover? And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water; follow him. And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? And he will show you a large upper room furnished and prepared; there make ready for us. And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto them; and they made ready the passover. And in the evening he cometh with the twelve." (Mark 14:12-17)  Quite a lot of detailed preparation went into the passover service, and such had been the case each year for some fifteen hundred years at the time the Savior kept it with His disciples on the eve of His crucifixion; all pursuant to the holy command; to wit:  "And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever." (Ex. 12:14) "And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service? That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord's passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped." (Ex. 12:26,27)  Each item in the passover service is of enormous life-and-death significance. For example, leaven must be thoroughly purged from the house and its contents. Leaven always stands for doctrinal heresy and moral uncleanness. The subject is mentioned several times, and the death penalty is provided; to wit: "Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses; for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger or born in the land. Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread." (Ex. 12:19,20)  The Jews say that after scrubbing the house clean a measured amount of leaven was scattered about and again scrubbed clean ­ it was a matter of life and death. Again, "And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and WITH BITTER HERBS THEY SHALL EAT IT." Ex. 12:8. I once preached in a mean little Arminian church in Pasadena, with "bitter herbs" as my text. I chastised everybody in the church for claiming to partake of Christ, the passover Lamb, but refusing to season it with bitter herbs; which I defined as suffering affliction with the people of God. One man stood to challenge me, saying, It was only when I see the blood that counts ­ not when I see bitter herbs. I say, what fool argues with the Destroyer? Why take the chance? Eat the bitter herbs! They never invited me back. What do you think? I love you. Amen.  
