Sunday, October 18, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ (i.e., Messiah, the Anointed One), the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock" ­ (Peter's Confession of Faith) ­"I will build my church; and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it." Mat. 16:13-18. "Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father...But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spirit; and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth. The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ; when he is come, he will tell us all things. Jesus saith unto her, I THAT SPEAK UNTO THEE AM HE." Jn. 4:21,23-26. "Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? And Jesus said, I AM; and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy; what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death." Mk. 14:61-64.  The little fat Roly-Poly pastor of the mega-church in San Antonio (John Hagee) says that Jesus did not come as Messiah when He came the first time, and that Jesus Himself never claimed to be the Messiah, and that therefore the Jews cannot be held responsible for denying Him (!) WOW (!) Hagee's sermons are regularly telecast over the Trinity Broadcasting Network. He has also made many of these wild and blasphemous and heretical theological assertions in a new book he has written titled In Defense of Israel. Hagee is a wealthy man, living on a huge $Multimillion estate just outside San Antonio. He has a thirty-ish or so roly-poly son who functions as assistant pastor of his father's huge mega-church. Hagee has been friends and associates for many years with such evangelical leaders as Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson. During the last few years Hagee has become a Hell-bound heretic for the Jews and Israel, devoting his time and his reputation to strange new doctrines. Four years ago he founded an outfit which he calls Christians United For Israel (CUFI), which he bills as "the nation's primary Christian Zionist organization."  Last July more than 4,000 people attended John Hagee's so-called "Night to Honor Israel" dinner in Washington DC, ­ all as reported by Pat Robertson's Christian TV News over the Christian Broadcasting Network (CBN). Speakers included Senator Joseph Lieberman, Fred Barnes, Gary Bauer, and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. During the last four years, John Hagee has produced dozens of such meetings, rallies and dinners ­ gatherings of "Christians" in support of Jews everywhere and in attempts to influence United States Middle East policy in favor of Israel. Hagee says God gave Palestine to Abraham and his seed the Jews ­ UNCONDITIONALLY ­ forever. And, it is increasingly clear that Hagee is willing to butcher Bible truth and his own relatively sound theology, in order to get impenitent, Christ-rejecting Jews to heaven, in the process.  Hagee is also willing to nuke as many Palestinians and all other Muslims as it takes to reclaim all of Palestine for the modern state of Israel. Yes. In a recent news report with a headline which reads, "Beware of Strange New Doctrines," John Hagee is blasted by his former theological bedfellows; to  Sunday, October 18, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  wit: "Pastor John Hagee is under intense fire from fellow Christians for assertions made in his new  book entitled, `In Defense of Israel.' The `Fire and Brimstone' preacher claims that his new discoveries  will shake the very foundations of Christian theology as understood today. Well, it certainly has shaken  some foundations, but not the ones he intended, instead it seems that it is his own ministry that may fall  victim to his new theology. Pastor Hagee asserts that JESUS DID NOT COME THE FIRST TIME AS  THE MESSIAH. He states that JESUS DID NOT CLAIM TO BE THE MESSIAH IN WORD AND  DEED. He also claims that if Jesus did not claim to be the Messiah then ISRAEL COULD NOT BE  HELD RESPONSIBLE FOR DENYING HIM."  Well, Beloved. That's about as heretical as you can get. But no worse than the Arminian heresy that is embraced by every priest, rabbi and preacher in the world today. In fact, it is their wild, God-loveseverybody Arminianism that breeds all such breath-taking heresies as that of Hagee about the Jews. Two passages of Scripture inform our duty at times such as this, giving us clear directions as to what paths to take; to wit: 1) 1 Cor. 11:19, and 2) Titus 1:9.  (1.) "For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you." 1 Cor. 11:19. The ears of God's little sheep, His Elect, do some serious twitching when Satan's bad words are set in juxtaposition to God's good words; to wit:  "And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him; for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers...My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me; And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand." (John 10:4,5,27-29)  Here is the Lord Jesus saying, in the solemn matter of sovereign election and the perseverance of the saints: "I and my Father are one;" whereupon the filthy Jews knew exactly that the Lord Jesus was claiming to be God, and for this reason they took up stones to kill Him, saying, "For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, MAKEST THYSELF GOD." Jn. 10:30,33. Surely, Hagee is demon-possessed and given over to the lies of Satan, to contend that Jesus Christ did not claim to be God when He was on earth the first time. Surely, Hagee is an antichrist referred to in First John, and is even now Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor. 16:22. I.e., Let him be accursed and damned forever, and come quickly, Lord Jesus, and damn him. "Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God; and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God; and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world." (1 Jn. 4:1-3)  Beloved, there was intense demonic activity in those few brief years when our dear Lord Jesus was preaching and casting out demons on this earth; and oft times those demons would scream and argue back with Him; e.g., "And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him. And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him... And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils. And all the city was gathered  Sunday, October 18, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  together at the door (Peter's just-healed mother-in-law's house). And he healed many that were sick  of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew  him...And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils." Mk. 1:23-  27,32-34,39.  And so it was, Beloved, by the nature of things, that when some great Bible truth is challenged ­ as by Roly-Poly and his sort ­ denying that Jesus came as Messiah, that we betake ourselves to the Scriptures with our senses sharpened, and alerted, and wide awake for battle. All our hopes for time and eternity are invested in the outcome. We bristle ­ neither asking quarter nor giving quarter.  (2.) "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers (like Roly-Poly Hagee), specially they of the circumcision; Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." Titus 1:911. And so it is before us in the form of a handsome volume whose internal integrity is unassailable and whose beauty of prose and poetry is incomparable ­ called the Bible. To the world, it is boring. To God's Elect, it is what the wordsmiths call, a Good Read.  In addition to the direct claims of Messiahship by the Lord Jesus (e.g., to the woman at the well, "I that speak unto thee am he" - Jn. 4:26), there are the lines of proof which I have called, The John the Baptist Factor, The Sins Forgiven Deduction, The Testimony of Demons Syndrome, etc.  The John the Baptist Factor: John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness, and declaring that he was not Messiah, but that One was following him whose shoes he was not worthy to unloose, and that HE WOULD BE THE MESSIAH. Thereupon, Jesus came, and John proclaimed him to be the longpromised Messiah: Behold the Lamb of God; to wit:  "The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me; for he was before me. And I knew him not; but that he should BE MADE MANIFEST TO ISRAEL, therefore am I come baptizing with water. And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not; but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. AND I SAW, AND BARE RECORD THAT THIS IS THE SON OF GOD...One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, WE HAVE FOUND THE MESSIAH, WHICH IS, BEING INTERPRETED, THE CHRIST." Jn. 1:29-34,40,41.  This testimony of John the Baptist, standing alone, would easily refute the silly blasphemy and heresy of Roly-Poly. Add to that the testimony of the apostle Andrew to his own brother Simon Peter, and behold what a powerful statement is made; to wit: "And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God...We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ." Jn. 1:34,41. The Sins Forgiven Deduction: "When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. BUT THERE WERE CERTAIN OF THE SCRIBES SITTING THERE, and reasoning in their hearts, Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? WHO CAN FORGIVE SINS BUT GOD ONLY? And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason these things in your hearts? Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk? But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house. And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all; insomuch that they were all  Sunday, October 18, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion." Mk. 2:5-12. This healing of the  man with palsy illustrates what I have called The Sins Forgiven Deduction! We DEDUCE that this Man  MUST BE THE MESSIAH FROM THE MIGHTY MIRACLES OF HEALING WHICH HE  PERFORMS. His avowed enemies knew that He claimed to be Messiah, and for that reason accused  Him of blaspheming when He said to the sick of the Palsy, "Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven  thee." Mat. 9:2.  Hagee says the Lord Jesus did not claim to be Messiah, and therefore the Jews did no wrong in rejecting Him as Messiah. Again and again, however, the Lord Jesus performed miracles that only the Messiah as God could perform. And the Jews ­ full well knowing that Jesus claimed to be performing such miracles of healing, (and casting out demons all along the way to boot) ­ AS MESSIAH (!) ­ I say, it makes no sense for the Jews to accuse Christ of blasphemy UNLESS HE CLAIMED OPENLY AND BOLDLY ­ AGAIN AND AGAIN ­ IN A MULTITUDE OF DIFFERENT WAYS AND SITUATIONS ­ TO BE THE MESSIAH. The Sins Forgiven Deduction!  Moreover, all the world of demon spirits ­ which impacts plentifully upon our world ­ recognized Jesus as God's Messiah, and cried out excruciatingly and agonizingly against His presence ­ AS MESSIAH ­ in this world, at this time; to wit: The Testimony of Demons Syndrome! To wit:  "And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I KNOW THEE WHO THOU ART, THE HOLY ONE OF GOD. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him. And they were all amazed." (Mk. 1:23-27)  Hagee says Jesus did not come as Messiah the first time. But Jesus Himself says differently. John the Baptist says differently. The scribes and Pharisees say differently. And, Satan and his unclean demon spirits also say differently. To wit: "And they came over to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes. And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit. Who had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with chains; Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces; neither could any man tame him. And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones. But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion; for we are many. And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country. Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding. And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine; and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea. And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what it was that was done. And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind; and they were afraid. And they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil, and also concerning the swine." Mk. 5:1-16.  Intense demonic activity in those days dealing with the first coming of our Lord Jesus; and we should consider the likelihood of intensive demonic activity in these days approaching His Second Coming. I love you. Amen.  
