Sermon to the Saints which are at Topeka, Kansas -- Sunday, October 26, 2014. Good afternoon beloved. "Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter." (Ezekiel 16:44) There is an examination of the words contained in Ezekiel 16 that, when joined with multiple other parts of Holy Scripture and current events in our society, should cause every lively soul -- living stone -- awakened member of Adam's race -- Elect precious of God -- to feel the words of Dr. Luke down to their toes, to wit: "Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven:" (Luke 6:23) The timing of the completion and issuance of the sign movie "God Still Hates Fags" was typically (for our Captain) impeccable; thanks be to God Almighty for that, and thank you Gabe for that good work. There is a bitch -- as in a female dog -- as in a female sodomite (Deuteronomy 23:18) -- running the government in Houston, Texas! Her name is Annise Parker, and she is one ambitious, filth-pushing, aggressive sodomite! If there was ever a place that deserved the likes of this crazed monster as Mayor, it is Houston, Texas! She is determined to be America's Jezebel: "And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him." (1 Kings 16:31) Gill: "This woman was not only of another nation, and an idolater, but a very filthy woman, and is made the emblem of the whore of Rome, #Re 2:20 ("Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.") As part of this abominable creature's campaign to sodomize Houston, Texas, and the whole of the US and world, she pushed through an ordinance to give transgender citizens the right to go into public restrooms -anywhere that is providing public accommodations (e.g., restaurants, schools, libraries, parks, etc.) -- of their gender choosing. So, if a lady goes into the ladies restroom at the local McDonalds in Houston, a dude that "thinks he's a lady" can waltz right in to the same restroom. Everybody is supposed to be good with this arrangement ... cuz otherwise transgender folks feel their gender identities are being offended. Y-I-K-E-S, YIKES! So, having been taken by surprise, some local faux-Christian folks in and around Houston started up a movement to put the question on the ballot. Silly them ... they're supposed to just take their sodomizing like good little American perverts ... cuz Annise says so! They collected three-to-four times the number of petition signatures than they needed to put the matter to a vote. But Queen Jezebel will not have it so; and had the petitions declared invalid. Page 1 of 11  To press the matter a little further, the faux-Christians filed a case to challenge the decision to declare the petitions invalid. In response, Annise -- hiding behind an army of volunteer pro bono fag attorneys who are ready to pour the whole of this country's gross domestic product into this fight, if necessary -- has some subpoenas issued to a few churches for the production of some documents, including sermons! Yes! In the United States of America, sodomite-controlled government has issued subpoenas for churches' sermons! First Amendment be damned! When these false prophet preachers managed to bring some pressure to bear regarding this audacious assault on religious freedoms, the filthy creature Annise belched forth this clever deceit: "If during the course of the sermon -- and I doubt this very much -- a pastor took 15 or 20 minutes to go into detail about how the petition process goes, then that's part of the discovery. ... But that's not about preaching a sermon on anybody's religious beliefs, it's not conveying a religious message, that's part of the petition process, and all we're interested in is the petition process." She, of course, is lying through her slimy sodomite mouth. She knows, just as we know, the fag manifesto brazenly declares "all churches who condemn us will be closed", and by the grace of God that will be true for every church but WBC! When the fags make a government-sponsored political movement out of cramming their filth down every citizen's throats, any scripture-based objection to it can be declared "not about preaching a sermon on anybody's religious beliefs", and thereby fag-run government declares de-facto war on religious freedoms and will close churches down! This event is cause for great celebration in this house, beloved! Be clear about this one fact: The relatively weak and confused uproar that occurred in this event will melt away in short order. In coming years, there will be no voice heard in effective opposition to these government leaders' invading of churches ... until the churches fully submit and heap their blessings upon every form of abomination. We know what Scripture teaches ... iterated by Daniel the prophet, and reiterated by our Lord, to wit: "And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate." (Daniel 11:31) "When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)" (Matthew 24:15) So, since dyke Annise wants a sermon ... the accommodating servants of God at Westboro Baptist Church will give her a sermon. We will place this wicked work of her hands into an accurate Bible framing and, if the Lord our God be gracious unto us we shall properly declare His glory in it! "As is the mother, so is her daughter." (Ezekiel 16:44) The historical "daughter" here is Judah. The spiritual "daughter" here -- I humbly submit -- is this grotesque nation we have been placed within to complete the work of the "mystery of God", as declared prophetically by John the Revelator: Page 2 of 11  "But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets." (Revelation 10:7) Ezekiel is one of those prophets referenced, and the words about which I speak this morning is part of the prophecy regarding the finishing of the mystery of God. This amazing oracle in Ezekiel -- running from chapter 16, verse 44 through verse 59 -- places some delightfully refreshing and energizing flesh upon this New Testament prophecy of Christ: "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Luke 17:28-30) Since we love to hear about the return of our King, the Christ ... the more we can understand about this matter the more comforted we are. Let us, therefore, examine this oracle in Ezekiel 16, so that we might see what the Lord has prepared for us. Here is the full text of the oracle, itemized in significant sections: [Section 1] "Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter. Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: [Section 2] your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. [Section 3] And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters. [Section 4] Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways. As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good. Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done. [Section 5] Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy Page 3 of 11  shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters. When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them: That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them. When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate. [Section 6] For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride, Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about. Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the LORD. For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant." (Ezekiel 16:44-59) Now as we dive into these blessed words and their application to our current events, I want to admonish the young in this sanctuary to open their ears and be instructed. Your contemporaries would have you believe that the phenomenon possessing this generation is a period of enlightenment in the earth. They have been convinced -- willingly, of course -- that they are on the brink of some evolutionary shove forward into an existence that is free from the shackles of physical, mental, and spiritual limitations in a way no previous generation has seen or heard of. As the preacher says: "The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun." (Ecclesiastes 1:9) But while there is no new thing under the sun ... there are some final things. It is plainly written, and with far too great precision to be discounted, that there will be a final day with very specific world events leading up to that final day. I cannot stop that reality. You cannot stop that reality. Annise Parker and her sodomite minions cannot stop that reality. Of a certainty, the lukewarm faux-Christians -- who, with their multiple sexual partners of every stripe populate the pews of the whorehouses across this vile land -- cannot stop that reality. There are two demographics related to that coming day -- as we have been heard to say about all important matters in heaven and earth. Only two demographics. Here are the words: "For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief." (1 Thessalonians 5:2-4) Hypocrite, lukewarm "Christians" together with their sodomitical spiritual brethren will be overtaken -- cussing each the other and slobbering over each other all the way to that day ... that hour ... that minute; when the proverbial rain starts! But we have light, and we have to take that light and shine it across the whole world! We got a sermon for you, Annise! Page 4 of 11  So consider this oracle, my friends, so that we might the more be prepared to be looking steadfastly into heaven from whence our deliverance shall come. [Section 1] "Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter. Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: (Ezekiel 16:44-45a) When you have a gathering of Saints -- saturated with that love that is so eloquently articulated throughout the Song of Solomon with language like this opening salvo: "Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better than wine." (Song of Solomon 1:2) -- what you will never see is the sight of loathing between those beloved. The pure church of God -- symbolized in the purest articulation of the Children of Israel -- has the greatest love for the Messiah! The Christ is the most loving and loved of husbands. And the children of that love are the Saints. So fitting is it, therefore, that the singular characteristic of these nasty bitches is that they utterly loathe their husbands and their children! Is that not this nation? Look at the audacity of this generation! It is a point of pride that the women of this generation either are without a husband altogether, or at a minimum have traded their sexual partners like so many cheap poker cards! And their children? Four thousand abortions a day? Those that they let live are immediately turned into idols and spoiled into awful, godless creatures -- without so much as a clue about what this blessed Word of God has to say about their duty to God and man! [Section 2] your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. (Ezekiel 16:45b) These words are spoken to a nation of people who were so intimately acquainted with the oracles of God, that they are said to have the greatest advantage, to wit: "What advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God." (Romans 3:1-2) Among those oracles are the words spoken to their fathers about the nations whose land they would be given to possess, and the abominations they wrought, to wit: "When the LORD thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;" (Deuteronomy 7:1). So grievous were those abominations -- rampant fornication, adultery, sodomy, incest, bestiality, etc. -- that when the Children of Israel received the law as it pertained to these gross sins, it expressly stated: "Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations [which included the Amorites and Hittites] are defiled which I cast out before you:" (Leviticus 18:24) Page 5 of 11  So there needs be very little exposition to understand that it was a blistering condemnation of the persons to whom Ezekiel prophesied -- ancient Judah and Doomed America -- that they had become de facto a whole generation of Amorite and Hittite offspring! The ultimate "yo mama" insults, if you will. [Section 3] And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters. (Ezekiel 16:46) Physically placed, if you were to be standing in the midst of Judah facing roughly East you would find Samaria (the Capitol -- and therefore representative -- of the ten Northern tribes of ancient Israel) on your left hand and you would find the plains where old Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim once stood on your right hand. the "daughters" here likely referencing those smaller entities (cities, towns, hamlets, etc.) of the greater named cities. Spiritually, these two are closely available examples of places where God's servants dwelt -- and therefore the great light of His truth shined. Where the blessings of God were poured out without measure upon the heads of grotesquely unthankful souls. Where, as a consequence, remarkable events brought about their destruction. Understanding these words "elder" and "younger" here help clear the meaning. "Gadol" is elder, and means "1) great 1a) large (in magnitude and extent) 1b) in number 1c) in intensity 1d) loud (in sound) 1e) older (in age) 1f) in importance" "Qaton" is younger, and means "1) young, small, insignificant, unimportant 1a) small 1b) insignificant 1c) young 1d) unimportant" The Northern kingdom of Israel was significantly larger than the Southern kingdom of Judah, having ten of the 12 tribes, and much greater territory. Sodom was a small but densely populated metropolis that consisted of five "cities of the plains" of which only the smallest was spared; Zoar. In fact, it is this use of the terms "elder" and "younger" that allows for our hearts to rejoice when we see daily the evidence of how our faithful God works in providence to make these words of Paul -- quoting the LORD's words to Rebekah: Page 6 of 11  "It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." (Romans 9:10) While the volume of humanity ... the expanse of apparent temporal power ... the seemingly endless supply of wealth, resources, influence, etc. that this little church's enemies possess looks to be capable of overwhelming us; in fact -- in very actual fact -- it is all and always being used to serve our needs in doing the work of the LORD. This includes the passel of dogs led by Annise Parker and the whole of the faux-Christian masses. ... but I digress [Section 4] Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways. As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good. Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done. (Ezekiel 16:47-51) I think it's worth a small detour here to note how this generation of filthy workers of iniquity take verse 49 (underlined above) from this collection of woeful declarations and use it to pretend that sodomy was really only severe inhospitality to the poor when you just have so much to give, being rich and with lots of time on your hands. They wrest this scripture, like they do all of this holy book. While verse 49 describes the Sodomites with perfection -- as it describes Doomed America with perfection -- so also does the next verse in the passage; adding that brand for which all history has known that wicked society and for which this nation we live in has become world famous: "And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me:" (v. 50a) This language here is significant, in that one would have great difficulty understanding how a society could get worse than Sodom ... worse than ancient Israel ... for wickedness. The sins themselves were the same ... the scope of influence and the degree of saturation, even in the face of such long-standing light of truth was much worse. Where Sodom was fully "giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh," (Jude 1:7) they were not blessed with the same light of God's truth -- so many prophets, priests, and kings being given them to move the people to obey the God of Eternity. Where the Northern Kingdom had places of false worship (Dan and Bethel), when Judah rotted the infection of false religion and then all abominations was according to the number of their cities. (Jeremiah 2:28) Further, they set up their filth directly in the very house of God! (Jeremiah 7:30) Indeed, since the capacity of the United States of America in 2014 to influence the whole of the earth toward sodomy -- and at present does so with the full military and political power it can muster -- the capacity, coupled with the intent to do this wickedness has surpassed any generation before it! There is not an effective voice left to speak, since all churches have suffered mortal spiritual wounds and most have quit the Page 7 of 11  field altogether and have the abomination of desolation parked in their pews! The sins of Samaria and Sodom are not only justified in this generation; they are magnified and glorified! THAT ... is wonderful news, my friends. But amazingly, the evidence of our calling and election does get better. [Section 5] Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters. When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them: That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them. When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate. (Ezekiel 16:52-55) Expanding upon the previous words, these four verses articulate the certain and just nature of the punishments that were to befall Judah. When the Dead Sea -- the Sea of Sodom -- transforms from the bituminous slime pit to a lush and fruitful landscape, gloriously displaying a bustling metropolis of happy, grinning sodomites who go about their abominable lives with impunity; then will I give a pass to the filth that has become what Judah! When the ten percent of the Northern tribes -- who were scattered throughout the kingdom of Assyria -- return and when life returns again to the other 90% of those wretched creatures. When Dan and Bethel again ring with the shouts and praise of grotesque idolaters and that filthy witch Jezebel herself rejoins her body parts from the dogs' bellies and retakes her nasty throne. THEN ... will I give a pass to you filthy Jews who inhabit the nation of Judah. What sayeth Christ on this subject? "And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." (Matthew 11:23-24) Likewise will it be -- must it be -- that this nation of the United States, and indeed this world that has seen the words of the Lord God preached plainly and freely and boldly in this generation -- that the immolated masses of Sodom will stand before God's judgment seat and point their black, blasted fingers at Annise Parker and all those who she stands representative of and declare that her (and their) stripes must be many, to wit: "And that servant, which knew his lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes." (Luke 12:47) These things bring us much comfort. As I have spoken from this pulpit on many occasions, there is a time declared. It is a hostile and deadly time. It is a time that is variously described in the book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which book we all have great affection for. A time of great distress and grief -- and yet with Page 8 of 11  supernatural comforts from our Comforter who has been sent to guide us into all truth (John 16:13). This passage gives the flavor: "And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held:" (Revelation 6:9) Those are real souls. Those are beloved souls. And, I have before and here again submit that the language "and for the testimony which they held" points to a significant and specific reality in time and context. That these referenced here are Saints who bore testimony that God's glory is in every one of the events that torment those who dwell on the earth. When God de-creates that last generation of this dispensation -which generation Fred Jr. did an amazing video news regarding some months ago -- the nature of that generation has to be as Christ says it will be. They have to, in all relevant respects, be as pre-conflagrated Sodom! The words that I have provided to you so far today are the contextual warm-up to this last portion of this oracle. The oracle -- the prophetic words of Ezekiel for the United States of America, and the world -- helps us to see that we have very real authority to believe the promise of Christ's coming. Christ is coming soon. [Section 6] For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride, Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about. Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the LORD. For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant." (Ezekiel 16:44-59) Last Tuesday a little troop of us went to preach to the tens of thousands who were pouring into the first game of the World Series at Royals' Stadium. Two loud-mouthed locals walked past the smaller of our two groups, and engaged in some dialog. One of our ladies asked the question that we've been asking this generation through sign, billboard, song, and sermon: "Why did God destroy Sodom?" She went a bit further in describing the utter destruction of that ancient city-state, at which time one of the two ladies lifted up voice and asked something like: "What was the name of that book that got burned? Did you say Sodom and something?" Shortly thereafter, the other of the two ladies declared: "My mama's a preacher!" and "My sister's a lesbian". Though the proverbial dots abounded ... there was not one single connection being made. That should help understand the opening clause of this final section of our oracle. This is a generation that has been made wholly ignorant about Sodom ... though these "New Testament's the bomb" faux-Christians need look only to the words of Peter to learn that it is a critical example given to us! "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly;" (2 Peter 2:6) Page 9 of 11  But in her pride, this wicked nation and world have wholly refused to even speak about that event. They cannot do so, lest their searching it out lead to the discovery that their fornication and adultery are the same "strange flesh" as that grotesque sin of sodomy. They are too lukewarm to spend any time honestly examining that horrifying event in history. They cannot let it be in their mouths in this day of their pride! That condition, however, is only the beginning of the beauty of this passage. What is to be said about verses 57 and 58, to wit: "Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about. Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the LORD." Just as things were in ancient Sodom ... where the rights of these vile, filthy homosexual dogs dominate every other right and interest in society ... they will be here. The pretense of these monsters like Annise Parker -that all these beasts want is for their sin to be as popular and accepted and respected as the mainstream sins of fornication and adultery -- is (as the historical accounts of Sodom and Benjamin attest) a loud lie! They believe they are superior. "Sodomite" means "holy one", and they truly believe they are the next evolution of the human creature, who both deserve and require worship by the lesser, hetero version of the human. That reality is what is the sense of this verse "thou has borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the LORD". As the fags in Sodom did -- coming together to surround Lot's house and demand the angels be sent forth for a good, wholesome fag-romp! Listen to these words from the homosexual manifesto: "The exquisite society to emerge will be governed by an elite comprised of gay poets. One of the major requirements for a position of power in the new society of homoeroticism will be indulgence in the Greek passion. Any man contaminated with heterosexual lust will be automatically barred from a position of influence. All males who insist on remaining stupidly heterosexual will be tried in homosexual courts of justice and will become invisible men." That's not hyperbole ... it is the reality that is coming to this nation. Because these faux-Christians have no substance, they will be metaphorically surrounded by these sodomites, but without the intervention of a loving God, they will relent. A closer look at that silliness in Houston -- a microcosm of what is shortly to come upon the whole nation -- reveals that the number of Christian pretenders engaging the dyke on her filth march is relatively small. Joel Osteen -- with his tens of thousands of "followers" -- is nowhere on the landscape! Other than an attempt at gaining some temporary political leverage, the whole of that matter is a tempest in a teapot! God would have it so. The most beautiful part of this oracle is the conclusion. This sodomizing of America -- including bringing the "power of the dog"; the snarling wolf-pack right into the face of and truly, even literally surrounding this little flock of slaughter -- is the last step before we see the conclusion of this matter, to wit: "For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant." (Ezekiel 16:59) Page 10 of 11  This language points to the assurance that Doomed america -- once blessed beyond measure with the light of the King of Heaven, and then having played the harlot and become that whore bitch Babylon -- will be fully and finally dealt with as God has instructively dealt with Sodom, Israel, and Judah before. It will look like this: "And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory. 2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. 3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double. How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her." (Revelation 18:1-8) We must, therefore go and tell this truth to Annise Parker, her sodomite minions, and the wretched fauxChristians of Houston, Texas -- who are in fact just another stripe of the whore that sitteth upon the scarlet colored beast. We must go and ask them why God destroyed Sodom. We must go to meet this enemy on the field that God has prepared, the Lord willing. We must do so with great joy and confidence! "The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published it." (Psalms 68:11) I love you all most dearly. Amen. Page 11 of 11  
