Sunday, December 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and  fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim,  because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim among  the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites. And the Gileadites  took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was  so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let  me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an  Ephraimite? If he said, Nay; Then said they unto him, Say now  SHIBBOLETH: and he said SIBBOLETH: for he could not frame to  pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the  passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites  forty and two thousand." Jgs. 12:4-6.  The saga of Jephthah ­ as recorded by the Holy Ghost in chapters 11 and 12 of the Book of the Judges ­ is fascinating on many accounts. Most of us think of Jephthah (rather unfavorably) as the goofy father who sacrificed his only child ­ a daughter ­ who did "offer her up for a burnt offering" to the Lord, because he had made an improvident, ridiculous vow to do so if the Lord gave him a military victory over the invading Ammonites. Jgs. 11:31. But remember, Beloved, that Jephthah was one of only seventeen Heroes of the Faith identified by name ­ beginning with Abel ! ­ in the Hebrews Chapter 11 Gallery of the Faithful; to wit:  "And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of JEPHTHAH; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens." (Heb. 11:32-34) And when the legitimate sons of Gilead, their father, drove Jephthah out, because "he was the son of an harlot," God pronounced him "a mighty man of valor," who gathered an army of "vain" men and became a skilled military genius. (Vain = rake. Rake = libertine, lecherous, dissipated. Quite an army for Jephthah to whip into top fighting, disciplined shape.) Jgs. 11:2,3. Such that, when the fierce Ammonites invaded, those who drove Jephthah out because "he was the son of an harlot," begged him to come back and take over their army; to wit:  "Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon. And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?" (Jgs. 11:6,7)  Having subdued the invading Ammonites, Jephthah was accosted by the Ephraimites, his own people, who said, "we will burn thine house upon thee with fire," for not taking them to war with him against the Ammonites! (Jgs. 12:1.) If you can believe that!  "Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands. And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the Lord delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me?" (Jgs. 12:2,3)  Sunday, December 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Whereupon, Jephthah marshaled his troops again, and this time administered a deadly beating to his own people, the Ephraimites, polishing off the fleeing residue of them "at the passages of Jordan," where their doom was sealed when they "could not frame to pronounce it (SHIBBOLETH) right." Jgs. 12:6. Beloved. This strategy ­ reflecting the supernatural genius of Jephthah, whereby 42,000 were slain and final and complete victory was achieved ­ was simple, and brilliant! Gill: "So that the Ephraimites paid dear for their pride and insolence."  I tell you, Beloved. Every time I read or hear some clumsy effort by the Antichristic Beast Obama to speak the language of Zion, I think of this verse and Psalm 87:4-6; to wit: "Behold Philistia (Palestine), and Tyre, with Ethiopia (Cush);" ­ (heathen lands and cities) ­ "this man was born there. And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. Selah." Psa. 87:4-6.  SHIBBOLETH must be spiritualized. It is a kind of password for the fording, or the passages of the River Jordan, without which none shall enter the Promised Land ­ without which, "they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan." Jgs. 12:6. "Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah." (Psa. 87:3) "Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound (SHIBBOLETH, etc.): they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance." (Psa. 89:15)  Further, there is an element of subtle trickery in this "say now Shibboleth" routine; to wit: Gill: "The word Shibboleth signifies a stream or course of water, at which they now were; and so it was as if they had bid them say, `may I, or let me, pass over the stream of this river;' and this being the case, though it was done to try them, and by their pronunciation learn whether they were Ephraimites or no, they were not upon their guard, but in a hurry, and at once expressed the word as they commonly did:" ­ (i.e., they blurted out, "Sibboleth," rather than "Shibboleth") ­ he was not careful to do it, though with some care he could, being not aware of the design of the Gileadites in it." This must be spiritualized; to wit: This supernatural and clever strategy, ­ wrought and devised by the hand and wit of Jephthah, the "mighty man of valor," and the military genius, ­ suggests the virtual impossibility of deceiving God's elect ­ I say VIRTUAL impossibility, because of the case of Judas Iscariot. Judas was present at the Last Supper, yet so clever was his deception, that when the Lord Jesus said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake." (Jn. 13:21,22) Judas was the well-known exception that proves the rule. The rule is, that nobody can successfully counterfeit the devious dialect or the clever password; e.g., to wit:  "And when he (the Apostle Peter) was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; FOR THY SPEECH BETRAYETH THEE." (Mat. 26:71-73)  In a slightly different sense, the doctrine and the warning of the Savior about the False Prophets and their inevitable evil fruits, applies here; to wit:  Sunday, December 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them." (Mat. 7:15-20) Beloved. We are God Almighty's Holy Fruit Inspectors. Watch out, Antichrist Beast Obama! Your fruit is evil. Your tree is coming down! Put another way, We are God Almighty's Holy Keepers of the Passages (the Fords, the shallow places) of River Jordan. Watch out, Antichrist Beast Obama ! You know what happens to those who cannot frame to pronounce the Password. You can fool everybody else in the world with your phony, corrupt, perverted, twisted, blasphemous and Satanic Bible talk. But not us. We see right through you; and, based on compelling, objective evidence, we denounce you as the Antichristic Beast you truly are. Here's what Obama says about his phony, contrived conversion experience in 1985, at the socalled Trinity United Church of Christ, where a huge picture of a Black Jesus greets all those entering the front doors of that sodomite whorehouse masquerading as a church; to wit: "But kneeling beneath that cross on the South Side of Chicago, I felt God's spirit beckoning me. I submitted myself to His will and dedicated myself to discovering His truth." Obama stands by this clap-trap of a yarn unto this day. I say, Hogwash ! Balderdash ! Did you get Antichrist Obama's three lying, blasphemous points? to wit: 1) I felt God's spirit beckoning me; 2) I submitted myself to His will; and, 3) I dedicated myself to discovering His truth. Beloved. Here's a man with the Bully Pulpit of the White House, and the Full Weight of his Office of the Presidency of the United States of America ­ all dedicated to promoting unrestricted abortion on demand ­ including partial birth abortion, where a living baby, outside his mother's womb and healthy, has his brains sucked out with a vacuum apparatus; and including the bloody murder otherwise of millions of babies; all in violation of God's plain command, "Thou shalt not kill," Ex. 20:13; and here is a man that promotes same-sex fag and dyke marriage, bestiality, incest, and every other abomination practiced under the rubric of sodomy, including eating each other's feces (scat), ingesting each other's semen, urinating on each other (golden showers), fisting, licking each other's anus (rimming), etc.; all in violation of God's plain commandments, e.g., "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination. Neither shalt thou lie with any beast, to defile thyself therewith." Lev. 18:22,23. I say, Beloved, here is a man, Barack Obama by name, who is wallowing in all such moral and spiritual filthiness far worse today than he did more than twenty-two years ago when he first began telling that lie about feeling God's spirit beckoning him, submitting himself to His will, and dedicating himself to discovering God's truth while kneeling beneath a cross on the South Side of Chicago.  What, in God's Name, is this profane idiot telling us? That the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, is beckoning him to butchering millions of babies, and to the sodomite whorehouses of San Francisco and Chicago and America and the world? That the will of God to which he has submitted himself, is for him to murder millions of babies, and lead the nation and the world in fornicating their eyeballs out, up the rump, with vast numbers of butt-buddies and animal friends? That the truth of God, which he has dedicated himself to discovering, is that the Bible is full of mistakes, and that all religions are no better and no worse than Christianity and the Bible ­ and to especially include Islam and the Koran, into which religion Obama was born and raised  Sunday, December 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  during his formative years, led by his Muslim father Obama Sr. and his Muslim stepfather, the  Indonesian Lolo Soetoro? And that we should enact criminal laws making it a new crime of "hate  speech" to criticize any other religion and/or to criticize any form of sodomy?  An event occurred in Missouri, during the recent presidential race, which signals the kind of tyranny and draconian laws we may expect in the Antichristian Beast Obama's reign. Evidently, someone had discovered the truth about Obama's Muslim background, and was telling it abroad. Obama wanted it stopped. It appears that Obama is super-sensitive on this subject, because there is a lot of truth waiting to be told on the subject of Obama's Muslim birth and youth. He wants it swept under the rug. It figures in to his role as the final Antichrist, the Beast of Rev. 13.  Beloved, we are fruit inspectors, and we are keepers of the passages of River Jordan, and we are the Lord's watchers on the wall, and we are not going to be quiet about Antichrist Obama. Listen to this passage from Stephen Mansfield's book entitled, "The Faith of Barack Obama," page 17; to wit: "The heart of the matter is that children born of Muslim lineage will be considered Muslims and according to Islamic law the door of apostasy (leaving Islam) will never be opened to them." Obama's father was a Muslim. Does that make Obama a Muslim? Experts on the law of Islam, shari'ah, say, Yes.  Also, Obama's stepfather was a Muslim, and he raised Obama for four years, age 6 to 10, in the Mosque of Jakarta, Indonesia, investing many hours of Islamic instruction every week; which is enough, standing alone, to make Obama a Muslim under Islamic law. Newspaper headlines in Missouri tell the story of Obama's budding tyranny and Antichristic oppression; to wit: "Missouri Sheriffs & Top Prosecutors Form Obama `Truth Squads' & Threaten Libel Charges Against Obama Critics," Sept. 25, 2008, shortly before election day. Missouri Gov. Matt Blunt issued a statement blasting Obama; to wit: "Barack Obama needs to grow up. Enlisting Missouri law enforcement to intimidate people and kill free debate is reminiscent of the Sedition Acts ­ not a free society." Sept. 27, 2008.  Beloved, the handwriting is on the wall, "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin, (America) is weighed in the balances of God Almighty, and is found wanting" ­ and it has fallen to us, praise the Lord, to tell it. Dan. 5:25-27.  "And who knoweth whether (we are) come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" (Esther 4:14)  We are fruit inspectors, pursuant to the express commandment of the Lord Jesus Christ; to wit:  "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them." (Mat. 7:19,20)  And, our ears are super-sensitive to the nuances of the password for the passage over River Jordan. It is too important to us. We are not going to stand for some Arminian jackass like the Muslim-bred Antichrist Beast Obama messing around with the only pathway to Glory. We know the Password. We are bound for the Promised Land. Just across Jordan. We know the passages. This matter has been spiritualized in song and sermon for hundreds of years. We will not be led astray by some Johnny-come-lately, cracker-barrel, Close-before-striking, Muslim-taught, Koran-honoring, cheap theologian.  Beloved. We've almost reached our heav'nly home, Our spirits loudly sing; The holy ones, behold they come! We hear their vesper wings. We see them now, in shining ranks, our friends and kindred dear, We feel the spray from Jordan's banks, the crossing must be near.  Amen.  
