Sunday, July 20, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who  through the eternal Spirit offered himself without  spot to God, purge your conscience from dead  works to serve the living God?" Heb. 9:14.  Beloved, when we came to Christ for salvation ­ with all the glorious things that such a "coming" entailed, and that I intend to discuss with this sermon ­ we at the same time also "came" to about seven additional entities ­ all as itemized in Heb. 12:22-24; to wit:  "But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, To the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written (or, enrolled) in heaven, and to God the Judge (or, Avenger) of all (i.e., all His people), and to the spirits of just men made perfect, And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the BLOOD OF SPRINKLING, that speaketh better things than that of Abel." (Heb. 12:22-24)  The first of these entities to which we have come unto is said to be mount Zion (otherwise called "the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem," or, three different expressions for the same thing). Dr. Owen says, "But to know the true reason why the apostle calls the state of believers under the New Testament by the name of Zion, we may consider some of the things that are spoken of Zion in the Scripture. And I shall instance in a few only, because they are multiplied throughout the whole Book of God; as:"  "(1.) It is the place of God's habitation, where He dwells for ever, Psa. 9:11 `Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Zion: declare among the people his doings;" Psa. 76:1-2 `In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel. In Salem also is his tabernacle, and HIS DWELLING PLACE IN ZION;' Joel 3:21 "For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed: FOR THE LORD DWELLETH IN ZION;' etc."  "(2.) It is the seat of the throne, reign, and kingdom of Christ, Psa. 2:6 `Yet have I set my king upon MY HOLY HILL OF ZION;' Isa. 24:23 `Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign IN MOUNT ZION, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients" ­ (i.e., his elect, from all eternity) ­ "gloriously;' Mic. 4:7 `And I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation: and the Lord shall reign over them IN MOUNT ZION from henceforth, even for ever;'"  "(3.) It is the object of divine promises innumerable, Psa. 69:35 `For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah: that they may dwell there, and have it in possession;' Isa. 1:27 `Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness;' of Christ himself, Isa. 59:20 `And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.'"  "(4.) Thence did the gospel proceed, and the law of Christ come forth, Isa. 40:9 `O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!' Mic. 4:2; `And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up  Sunday, July 20, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his  ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the  Lord from Jerusalem.'"  Beloved, you see how the Old Testament words and prognostications of Zion have never, and can never, apply to earthly Zion; but how they may apply to a true New Testament church state. And listen on to a few more pronouncements of the glories ­ both now and more to come ­ of Zion; to wit:  "(5.) Zion is the object of God's especial love, and the place of the birth of God's elect, Psa. 87:1-3,5-6 `His foundation is in the holy mountains. The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God... And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there.'"  "(6.) Zion is The joy of the whole earth, Psa. 48:1-3,8-9,11-14 `Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. God is known in her palaces for a refuge...As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah. We have thought of thy loving-kindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple...LET MOUNT ZION REJOICE, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments. Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof. Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the generation following. For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death.'"  "(7.) Salvation, and all blessings come forth out of Zion, Psa. 14:7 `Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad." Psa. 110:2 "The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.' Psa. 128:5-6 `The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Yea, thou shalt see thy children's children, and peace upon Israel.'"  With many other verses and passages containing sundry other things alike glorious. Now these things were not spoken of nor accomplished towards that physical mount Zion which was ­ and is to this day ­ situated in Jerusalem, where the greedy Jews are fighting and scrapping with greedy Arabs, all as foretold in the Bible. Despite what the little, rolly-poly, screwball, nut-cake preacher in San Antonio says. Beloved. Use your head. This is a no-brainer. In no sense whatsoever can this multitude of glorious things which the Holy Ghost has said about mount Zion possibly be applied to that bit of real estate in modern Jew-controlled Jerusalem.  Dr. John Owen (1616 - 1683) was ­ and probably is to this very day ­ recognized as the greatest and most prolific of all the Puritan writers and preachers ­ in the Golden Age of Puritanism. He was chaplain to Oliver Cromwell, was Chancellor of Oxford University, and was often invited to preach to Parliament. Owen said this about how, and in what sense, we are COME TO MOUNT ZION; to wit:  Sunday, July 20, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Now these things" ­ (i.e., these passages of Scripture about mount Zion) ­ "were not spoken of nor accomplished towards that mount Zion which was in Jerusalem absolutely, but only as it was typical of believers under the gospel. So the meaning of the apostle is, that by the gospel believers do come unto that state wherein they have an interest in, and a right unto, ALL THE BLESSED AND GLORIOUS THINGS that are spoken in the Scriptures concerning and unto Zion. All the privileges ascribed, all the promises made unto it, are theirs. Zion is the place of God's especial gracious residence, of the throne of Christ in his reign, the subject of all graces, the object of all promises, as the Scripture abundantly testifies. This is the first privilege of believers under the gospel. They "come unto mount Zion;" that is, they are interested in all the promises of God made unto Zion, recorded in the Scripture, in all the love and care of God expressed towards it, in all the spiritual glories assigned unto it. The things spoken of it were never accomplished in the earthly Zion, but only typically; spiritually, and in their reality, they belong unto believers under the New Testament."  Beloved, these are exceeding great and precious promises, which Peter surely had in mind when he wrote "to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ," 2 Pet. 1:1, saying, "Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust." 2 Pet. 1:4. Beloved. We must bestir ourselves, and lay hold upon the hope that is set before us, "Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; wither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec," Heb. 6:14-20, and who entered the Holy of Holies in heaven, not with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own precious blood, and "who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God," Heb. 9:14, and, by pleading for us on the merits of His own shed blood, maketh intercession for the saints; to wit: "Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us." (Rom. 8:34)  Beloved, all these promises and privileges are ours, and we must continually be studying them, and claiming them as our own, and pleading them through the "BLOOD OF SPRINKLING," even the last of the items listed as the things to which we "ARE COME," Heb. 12:24. Some look upon these blessed promises and privileges as nothing more than things dead and useless, and esteem it presumptuous to plead and claim an interest in them, or to expect accomplishment of them towards themselves. BUT, this expressly contradicts the apostle, who affirms that we are "COME TO MOUNT ZION," at a time when the earthly mount Zion was in a state of complete and utter ruin, destruction, and abandonment.  Now let us look again at our text, which plainly says that the blood of Christ shall purge our conscience from dead works to serve the living God ­ in other words, the blood of Christ, when sprinkled upon the souls of the Elect, sequesters them from the corrupt mass of mankind, and saves their souls! ("to serve the living God" ­ which said service, or works, constitutes solid  Sunday, July 20, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  evidence that their calling and election is sure, 2 Pet. 1:10). All as typified and shadowed forth  by the law of Moses when the blood of bulls and goats and calves was sprinkled on the Jewish  congregation, and on the covenant, and on the priests and furnishings of the tabernacle; to wit:  "For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people...Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry. And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission." (Heb. 9:19,21-22)  "But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle... Neither by the blood of goats and calves, BUT BY HIS OWN BLOOD he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us...For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but INTO HEAVEN ITSELF, NOW TO APPEAR IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD FOR US." (Heb. 9:11,12,24)  Beloved, it is a great mystery, and a glorious sight to the eyes of our sanctified understanding; to wit:  "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: the EYES OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING BEING ENLIGHTENED." (Eph. 1:17,18)  O, Beloved, do you see ­ i.e., have the eyes of your understanding been enlightened to see? ­ yonder in Heaven, the glorious sight of our dear Lord Jesus, ­ in fulfillment of all the types and shadows of the Old Testament ­ as our great High Priest ­ entering the holy of holies in Heaven, with a basin filled with his own precious blood ­ which He sprinkles on the Mercy Seat, and the covenant, and the people of His covenant, and in all particulars ratifies the Atonement for all the Elect ­ even for each and every one of those for whom He died ­ AND NOT A SINGLE ONE MORE. All this ­ and much, much more ­ is held to our sanctified view ­ when we are told that we "are come unto...the BLOOD OF SPRINKLING, that speaketh better things than that of Abel." Heb. 12:22,24.  Beloved, the holy stream of blood that flowed from our blessed Savior's body so long ago ­ thereby producing His death ­ has a voice in it, that still speaks to us today. Traill: "The believer is to see his justification STREAMING from the life-blood of the Son of God." It is a glorious mystery, and it is a grand means of our salvation, that we should think on, and admire, and wonder at, and praise, and diligently study, all our days. We have ­ indeed ­ "come to the blood of sprinkling." Traill says:  "That the sprinkled blood of Jesus Christ hath so great a hand in our salvation, and is so great a part of it, shall be to call upon you to a holy wondering and admiring at this strange way of our salvation; at this saving us by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus ! To take a view of this sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, and wonder at it, that this should have so great a hand in our salvation, I shall offer a few things about it; to wit: There appears herein to be most wonderful love towards a certain group (i.e.,  Sunday, July 20, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  a remnant of persons). Pray observe what I say: In making this sprinkling of the  blood of Jesus to be the grand means of our salvation, there appears to be wonderful  love towards these people. That is to say, Jesus Christ DID NOT DIE AT A  PERADVENTURE !"  Beloved, would you please just listen to that marvelous line from that old Puritan; to wit: "JESUS CHRIST DID NOT DIE AT A PERADVENTURE ! The shed blood of Jesus Christ is speaking yet today, (Heb. 12:24), and one thing it is shouting from the housetops, if I may so say, is this: JESUS CHRIST DID NOT DIE AT A PERADVENTURE !" Traill goes on:  "The great price of his death was not laid down, and he ignorant of what should come of it. He knew exactly (if I may so say) every penny that he laid down, and every redeemed soul that he was to take up. He gave his life a ransom for MANY, (Matt. 20:28) and every one of those MANY were known unto him. `I know my sheep,' saith our Lord, `and I lay down my life for them,' Jn. 10:14,15. Oh what a rotten doctrine is that which possesses the minds of a great many people, who think that the Son of God laid down his life to be a sufficient price for the saving of men, and then left it to men to improve this price, according as their own free-will should incline them; so that at this rate Christ might have died and no man been saved by him. If I may so say, this was to make Christ die as a fool dieth (2 Sam. 3:33); but our Lord Jesus is infinitely wise, and knew well wherefore he laid down His life. `But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.' 1 Cor. 1:24,25. There was infinite wisdom, infinite power, and infinite, selective love for His Elect, in the shed blood of sprinkling of Jesus Christ; to wit: `To him that loved US, and washed US from our sins in his own blood;' Rev. 1:5; If I may so say, all the life-blood of the Son of God was drawn out of his veins, by the force of the love of his heart for his Elect, pumping it out. Whenever you read or hear this word, THE SPRINKLING OF THE BLOOD OF JESUS, and learn of its great interest in our salvation, you should say, `Behold how he loved US!' Jn. 11:36. `But ye are come unto mount Zion...and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel.' Heb. 12:22,24."  Toplady said that Charles Wesley was an Arminian like his brother John, but in his hymnwriting he was pure Calvinist ­ as here:  Amen.  "Arise, my soul, arise! Shake off thy guilty fears; The bleeding Sacrifice, in thy behalf appears. He ever lives above, for me to intercede; His all-redeeming love, His precious blood to plead. Five bleeding wounds He bears, received on Calvary; they pour effectual prayers, they strongly plead for me. Forgive him, O forgive, they cry, Nor let that ransomed sinner die."  
