Sunday, October 14, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen..." (Acts 11:19)  "Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth. But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:51-56)  My Hebrew prof. at BJU said the recitation of Stephen to the Jewish council that murdered him, Acts 7, was a short course in Hebrew history.  For more than 20 years this humble little church, on a daily basis, has picketed on the mean streets of fag-dominated USA -- truly an amazing feat, probably unequaled in all human history. It was certainly a product of daily miracles. I said daily. Not most days. Daily. Not a majority of days. Daily. Directly at the hands of a sovereign God. All 50 states. 875+ cities. 49,000+ pickets. Documented. Warning America -- and the world -- of their sodomite and same-sex doom. God has counted us faithful, putting us in this ministry. We are in our 57th year as a church, and our 22rd year of daily picketing and warning of the sodomitical menace -- all for the love that we bear for the King of the Place. The Commission He gave us to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature -- is still good. America terrorized WBC for faithful gospel preaching. Now God Almighty uses terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan in revenge against America, sending thousands of American kids home in body bags, and many thousands more home as helpless, hopeless multiple amputees and cripples hideously maimed for life, their minds and bodies forever destroyed. When will you learn? America has become WBC's terrorist -- for many years committing a long line of unsolved, uninvestigated, unpunished, violent crimes against us -- so now God has become America's Terrorist. America -- Land of the sodomite damned -- cursed of God and doomed. God Hates America. Persecuting WBC for warning you about fag sins is pouring gasoline on the fires of God's wrath. Here's one of thousands of Bible passages confirming that doctrine; to wit: "...light is come into the world (i.e., God has sent Westboro Baptist Church to preach the truth to you), and men loved darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil (i.e., you are a filthy, practicing fag, or, which is worse, you are a fagenabler). For, everyone that doeth evil (sodomites and their enablers), hateth the light... (which is why you plot to kill WBC saints); but he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God." (Jn. 3:19-21.) And now, this: "And they (God's Elect) cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" (Rev. 6:10) "And the Lord said...And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto him...? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily." (Lk. 18:6-8)  Sunday, October 14, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  For many months now, Beloved, the Lord has been speaking to the children of men in His wrath: fires, floods, tornadoes, wars, failed crops, shootings, tsunamis -- all bearing the unmistakable stamp of God's wrath and vengeance upon America, for persecuting His faithful servants at WBC. And we promise you, that we at WBC are praying fervently day and night for God's wrath to increase infinitely more against this evil land -- and we rejoice and thank God for every disaster, tragedy, dead body and chuck-full body bag. Furthermore, God is Himself laughing and mocking even as He pours out His wrath on this evil sodomite nation that has rejected His word and persecuted His only remaining faithful servants who are delivering His word. Anyone who does not believe THAT, is Bible-dumb, willingly ignorant, hates God and His Word, and is headed irreversibly for Hell.  Here is another sampling of God's Truth on the subject; to wit: "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against His anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. HE THAT SITTETH IN THE HEAVENS SHALL LAUGH: THE LORD SHALL HAVE THEM IN DERISION. (i.e., GOD IS LAUGHING AND MOCKING AND TAUNTING THESE BIG SHOTS, EVEN AS HE SPEAKS TO THEM IN HIS WRATH.) Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure." Psa. 2:1-5.  And this further sampling of passages showing that the God of the Bible is not a maudlin wimp, and rejoices in satisfaction with all His works - even when He pours out His wrath in vengeance upon sinners for maltreating His servants who speak His words to this adulterous and sinful generation. The church age, New Testament picture of Christ as an avenging God is no different - He is the same, yesterday, today and forever. Heb. 13:8. "And in the midst of the seven candlesticks (churches) one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. His head and his hair were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last..." (Rev. 1:13-17) "And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." (Rev. 19:14-16)  If you do not have that picture of God and our Lord Jesus Christ you have not seen him as he is and you are going to Hell for it. Such is a Holy term of art describing and identifying God's elect: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." 1 Jn. 3:2. "Yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another... (i.e., he will be no stranger, but the same Holy One I will recognize, for I have seen Him as he is.)." Job 19:26, 27.  Sunday, October 14, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  The preachers who try to sanitize, popularize, and make the God of the Bible more palatable, are going to Hell and taking all their followers with them. And that includes nearly every preacher and rabbi in America. I tell you that God is killing and maiming troops in Iraq and Afghanistan in vengeance on America for pushing sodomy and for persecuting WBC - and God is laughing and mocking America as He does so; to wit: "Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will LAUGH at your calamity; I will MOCK when your fear cometh; When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you." (Prov. 1:24-27) When a young veteran conspired to murder WBC's gentle servants of God - you Hell-bound Americans think that's fine. When God Almighty sends those same soldiers home in little pieces in body bags, you same Hell-bound Americans get mad when we think THAT's fine. We are supposed to rejoice when we see the vengeance of God poured out on America - Land of the Sodomite Damned. To wit: "The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet (a refreshing Middle Eastern custom) in the blood of the wicked. (It refreshes us when we hear of dead bodies coming home from Iraq or Afghanistan.) So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth." Psa. 58:10, 11. Thank God for IEDs. Thank God for Dead Soldiers. America is a nation of sodomite pagan idolaters, worshiping a flag and worshiping the dead - the dunghill gods of ancient Sodom. It is no coincidence that our sovereign God decreed the beginning of our miraculous street ministry at the time of America's national orgy of idolatrous patriotism called Memorial Day.  Dr. Samuel Johnson said patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel. America is a nation of fagenabling scoundrels. Other American antichrist orgies include July 4, Flag Day, Armed Forces Day, Veterans Day, Constitution Day, Law Day, etc., you name it, we picket it. The false prophets are to blame. Ezekiel 13:2 "Son of man, prophesy against the prophets..." Ezekiel Chapter 13 is a treasure trove of vital information about false prophets - male - and especially - female. They are a major - if not the dominant - cause of the final doom of this nation. "And many (the multitudes) shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of." 2 Pet. 2:2. Elegant metaphors are freely used about them and their devices. God's mystery messages to His little sheep. It is the solemn duty of WBC to denounce them - by diligently expounding the many Bible passages identifying them: "Son of man, prophesy against the prophets..." (Ezekiel 13:2)  They are fungible worldwide. It is irrelevant what they call themselves: Mormons, Methodists, Catholics, Protestants, Muslims, Buddhists, Pagans, Atheists, Amish, etc. In the aggregate they are the Great Whore of Revelation 17. "And when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration." v. 6. Strong: 2296 from 2300: When I looked at her closely until I perceived the truth about her, I was startled, stunned, shocked with great amazement. "Wherefore didst thou marvel?" v. 7. Strong: 2296! They are easily identified - said Christ - by their fruits. Matt. 7:15-20. Many of those fruits are described in Ezekiel 13. Their dominant theme of lies is - that God's horrific warnings of final Judgment and eternal Hell are not to be taken seriously - just the opposite: Peace! All will go well in time and eternity for the wicked. Ezekiel 12:22-28. The Wall guarantees security. Ezekiel 13:10-16. "Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one build up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter: (Gill: daubed it with untempered morter; i.e., they put loose stones together  Sunday, October 14, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  and threw Slushy Stuff upon them - watery sand without lime - covered with whitewash. Acts  23:3 - "Thou whited wall.") Say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall  fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy  wind shall rend it. Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is the  daubing wherewith ye have daubed it? Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I will even rend it  with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and  great hailstones in my fury to consume it. So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed  with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall  be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall  know that I am the Lord. Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that  have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they  that daubed it; To wit, the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which  see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord God." (Ezekiel 13:10-16)  More on the wall at Isaiah 30:8-14: "Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord; Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits; Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon: Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as a breaking of the potters' vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit." Isaiah 30:8-14. "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying Where is the promise of his coming?" 2 Peter 3:3,4. "Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the Lord? Let it come now." Jeremiah 17:15. (i.e., defiantly, Bring it on!! We dare you!) The female false prophets are especially denounced. Ezekiel 13:17-23. "Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them, And say, Thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the women that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you? And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies? Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold I am against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly. Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life: Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations; for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that I am the Lord." (Ezekiel 13:17-23)  I love you. Amen.  
