Sunday, August 8, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "My sons, be not now negligent; for the Lord hath chosen you to stand before  him, to serve him, and that ye should minister to him, and burn incense (i.e.,  offer prayers and supplications unto Him)." 2 Chronicles 29:11. "Thou,  therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the  things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness (or, rather, hardships), as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier." 2 Tim. 2:1-4. "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine." 1 Tim. 5:17.  The world thinks that intelligent, industrious, educated men who spend their lives planting Gospel seed in rocky soil and hardscrabble ground of virtual zero productivity ­ I say, the world thinks such men are fools. But what do the angels think? What does the great cloud of witnesses who compass us about to smile at us from the pages of Holy Writ and urge us ever onward, and upward to Heaven's glory ­ I say, what do they think? To these blessed ones, there is no occupation more honorable than that of expounding the Word of God (er, that would be preaching the Bible to you, sir). To them, "double honor" means DOUBLE HONOR. No kidding. To them, if one should take the most exalted position of employment in the whole, wide world ­ that the world deems most honorable ­ and then double the honor due that position, only then would one be approaching the honor which is rightfully due unto the faithful Gospel preacher; to wit: "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, ESPECIALLY they who labor in the word and doctrine." (1 Tim. 5:17) "Study (i.e., give all due diligence) to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing" ­ (i.e., accurately portioning out appropriate passages of Holy Scripture) ­ "the word of truth." 2 Tim. 2:15. As Dr. Gamaliel warned the ad hoc council considering the fate of Peter and the other apostles; to wit: "And now I say unto you, REFRAIN FROM THESE MEN, and let them alone; for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought; But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply YE BE FOUND EVEN TO FIGHT AGAINST GOD. And to him they agreed; and when they had called the apostles, AND BEATEN THEM, THEY COMMANDED THAT THEY SHOULD NOT SPEAK IN THE NAME OF JESUS, and let them go." (Acts 5:38-40) Beloved, this incident in the lives of the apostles contains much divine wisdom for us, and we need to pray as we read and study, always, on this wise; to wit: "(I) Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers; That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of WISDOM AND REVELATION IN THE KNOWLEDGE OF HIM; the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of your calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and What is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, WHEN HE RAISED HIM FROM THE DEAD, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the church, Which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all." Eph. 1:1623.  Now, Beloved, let us pray as we read and study this typical event in the lives of the apostles. First, Peter and the other apostles were arrested for preaching God's lively Word ­ just as we have often been arrested on trumped up charges; and for no legitimate reason; but only for unpopular Words from our Heavenly Father. The following scenario has a very familiar ring to it; to wit: "Then came one and told them, saying, Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people (words). Then went the  Sunday, August 8, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  captain with the officers, and brought them without violence; only because they feared the people, lest they  should have been stoned. And when they had brought them, they set them before the council; and the high  priest asked them, Saying, Did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name? (i.e.,  the blessed Name of the Lord Jesus Christ) and, behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine (words), and intend to bring this man's blood upon us. Then Peter and the other apostles answered and  said, We ought to obey God rather than men. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, WHOM YE SLEW  and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give  repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the  Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him. When they heard THAT (words), they were cut  to the heart, and TOOK COUNSEL TO SLAY THEM. Then stood there up one in the council, a  Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded  to put the apostles forth a little space; And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men." Acts 5:25-35.  This is about where Bro. Gamaliel stepped in and warned the council; to wit: "And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; ...Lest haply ye be found even to fight against God." Acts 5:38-39. The high priest loudly accused Peter and the other apostles with filling Jerusalem with their doctrine, and for intending to bring the precious blood of the dear Lord Jesus down upon their heads, i.e., for intending, by their fiery preaching to blame the Jews for murdering Christ, and for filling Jerusalem with their thunderous, Doom's Day doctrine ­ (The Lord Jesus seems to have put His seal of approval upon holy, thunderous-style preaching, when He personally surnamed James and John, Boanerges, which means, The Sons of Thunder).  Beloved, is it not true, that we at Westboro Baptist Church would be overjoyed if it should be said by the enemies of God in the earth ­ i.e., the Earth-Dwellers ­ that we in our little flock have succeeded in filling our home-city, state, nation, and the whole world; i.e., to wit: Topeka, Kansas, the United States, and the entire inhabited earth ­ I say, we would be thrilled if the Hell-bound reprobates of earth complained that WBC has filled the whole world with this blessed doctrine that we preach. That's what we work and pray for every day and night. We believe that is the only way to discharge our duty to "make full proof of our ministry" and experience the other blessed things set forth in the last writings of Paul before his violent death; to wit: the 4th chapter of second Timothy; to wit: "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. (1) But WATCH THOU in all things, (2) ENDURE AFFLICTIONS, (3) DO THE WORK OF AN EVANGELIST, (4) MAKE FULL PROOF OF THY MINISTRY. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." (2 Tim. 4:1-8) And, Beloved, as to the second charge brought against Peter, et al., that they did intend to bring this man's (i.e., the Lord Jesus Christ's) blood upon the Jews; again, we certainly do so intend, and this time in a twofold sense. We at WBC do indeed intend by our preaching to "bring this Man's (i.e., Jesus') blood upon the Jews," in the sense that the Jews killed Jesus, and the curse of God upon the Jewish people has grievously bedeviled and tormented the Jews all over the world for 2,000 + 500 years ever since. Only a stubborn, hard- hearted, stiff-necked, Jewish son of Belial would deny it, let alone try to argue against it. Of course we intend to thus preach this Bible truth to Jews as well as Gentiles ­ JEWS KILLED JESUS, WITH THE HELP OF GENTILES. And Jesus has not forgotten it; to wit:  Sunday, August 8, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." (Rev. 1:7) The other way that WBC intends to bring down the blood of Christ upon the Jews, is to reach the "Good Fig Jews" ­ at least 144,000 of them ­ I say we will seek to win those good Jews to acknowledge that Jesus Christ is the Son of God ­ Israel's promised Messiah; for it is only the blood of Jesus Christ that cleanseth the Elect Jews AND Gentiles of sin. The saints at WBC have been busy for years looking ­ diligently looking ­ for "Good Fig Jews" thinking that such will be a harbinger of last things and the end of the world. See,  Jeremiah, chapter 24. See, also, Zech. 12:10; to wit:  "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; AND THEY SHALL LOOK UPON ME WHOM THEY HAVE PIERCED, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn." (Zech. 12:10)  That these passages refer to our dear Lord Jesus as He hung on the cross at both Jew and Gentile murderers' hands, there can be no doubt; to wit: "But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs; But one of the soldiers WITH A SPEAR PIERCED HIS SIDE, and forthwith came thereout blood and water. And he that saw it" ­ (i.e., John, the apostle Jesus loved, surnamed Boanerges, Son of Thunder in his preaching) ­ "bare record, and his record is true; and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe. For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken. And again another scripture saith, THEY SHALL LOOK ON HIM WHOM THEY PIERCED." Jn. 19:34-37.  The modern Jews must repent of their sins and be honest and sincere about their part in the crucifixion and death of the dear Lord Jesus. They must cease their quibbling about who killed Christ, like some pettifogging lawyer arguing some tiny point of law hoping thereby to cloud the real issue only to confuse the jury if not the judge. As long as they continue their dishonest ways as a lifestyle, they will never come to the Lord Jesus for salvation, and they will split Hell wide open when they die. Listen up, you pettifogging Jews (!)(!) God has called the saints at Westboro Baptist Church to preach the truth to you, whether you like it or not. The command of the risen Savior was simple; to wit: Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature; he that believeth and is baptized will be saved; he that believeth not shall be lost and damned in Hellfire and brimstone forever ­ Jew or Gentile! And you can yell "anti-semitism!" until your chicken soup runs dry! James and John are not the only Sons of Thunder with a surname given them of God. There is a true sense in which all God's Elect on earth have been surnamed Boanerges, Sons of Thunder, by the Heavenly Father: "And they went forth preaching everywhere, the Lord also working with them, and confirming their word with signs following." (Mk. 16:20)  You money-grubbing Jews have long ago intimidated timid preachers to absolute silence; but WBC is not intimidated. We are Bible preachers. The Bible is full of unflattering references to virtually every nation, kindred, tongue and tribe ­ i.e., all of mankind. Jews are included. We will not discriminate against the Jews by keeping silent when it is their turn to be preached to; e.g., to wit:  "Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know; Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, YE HAVE TAKEN, AND BY WICKED HANDS HAVE CRUCIFIED AND SLAIN. ... Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, WHOM YE HAVE CRUCIFIED, BOTH LORD AND CHRIST." (Acts 2:22,23,36)  Sunday, August 8, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  There, my Jewish friends, are the plainest of declarations from the most reliable of sources, that the Jews  killed Christ. So, how about you shut your slimy, fork-tongued mouth about your so-called anti-semitism  boogey man. Take a hint from your ancient kin who were present on that day so long ago when Peter was preaching these things, and repented of their sins and turned to Jesus Christ for their salvation; to wit: "Now  when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles,  Men and brethren, what shall we do?(?)(?)(!)(!)(!) Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized  every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." Acts 2:37,38. Beloved. Notice these words:  "Now when they heard this, THEY WERE PRICKED IN THEIR HEART." (Acts 2:37)  Here is pure Calvinism. Those Jews that were pricked in their heart were God's Elect. It is the sovereign work of God the Holy Ghost to prick human hearts upon the hearing of God's Word. Once the heart is pricked the plaintive wail comes forth: "Men and brethren, WHAT SHALL WE DO?(?)(?)(!)" Beloved.  How beautiful is that? Until the Holy Ghost pricks the heart, all preaching is sounding brass and tinkling cymbal. I believe that this evil nation in this evil world has grieved the Holy Spirit ­ in effect, driving Him from these filthy, vile shores. "Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God." Eph. 4:30.  Certainly, the days following the first Pentecost of the early church, were glorious days; but the signs of the times and rightly dividing the Word of truth tell us that those days are gone; and the next wave of Heavenly glory will arrive on this earth with the Second Coming of our dear Lord Jesus. "For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, EVEN AS MANY AS THE LORD GOD SHALL CALL. And with many other words did he (Peter) testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation (i.e., this GENERATION OF SEX PERVERTS). Then they that GLADLY RECEIVED HIS WORD were baptized; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls."Acts 2:39-41.  There appears to be something of an anomaly here (i.e., an anomaly is a deviation from the normal order of things). In the first place, the people of the generation of Christ and His apostles on earth seem to have been about as degenerate, depraved, debauched and perverted as those people just before the destruction of Sodom, the Flood, and the antediluvian world ­ i.e., to wit: a time when ALMOST NOBODY WAS SAVED. And yet, right in the midst of a generation of rabble-rousing people so satanically evil as to commit the most heinous crime in human history ­ i.e., THE CRUCIFIXION OF THE SON OF GOD (!) ­ many thousands of God's Elect dwelt and gloriously received their Heavenly Call to salvation.  The situation exalts the absolute sovereignty and predestination of God; all as those glorious attributes of the Almighty join to launch the infant church; to wit: 1) "Now when they heard this, they were PRICKED IN THEIR HEART," a sure and certain proof that those thus pricked in the heart are God's Elect; 2) "For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, EVEN AS MANY AS THE LORD OUR GOD SHALL CALL"; only God's Elect ­ and all of God's Elect ­ hear this CALL; another sure and certain proof that those hearing this CALL are God's Elect; and, 3) "Then THEY THAT GLADLY RECEIVED HIS WORD were baptized; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls (and a few days later, 5,000 more were added to the church)." Only God's Elect ­ and all of God's Elect ­ "GLADLY RECEIVE HIS WORD;" more sure and certain proof that many of God's Elect were living on earth in the days of Christ and His apostles, which is an anomaly to the norm established by such cases as the destruction of Sodom, the Flood, and the antediluvian world.  Beloved. How is it with us in our generation? What do the signs of the times say? How do we rightly divide the word of truth? I only suggest a few things at this time when we are in a state of worldwide flux. The paucity of the Elect apparent to us in our day does suggest that we are following the norm, "as it was in the days of Noah...(and) Sodom." On the other hand, what shall we do with the Good Figs of Jeremiah, chapter 24? and the 144,000? This is no trivial number. But, Beloved, any which way our Heavenly Father and our Captain chooses for us, we are bound for the Promised Land.  I love you. Amen.  
