Sunday, May 31, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience  of the people; and therein was found written, that the  Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the  congregation of God for ever; Because they met not the  children of Israel with bread and with water, but hired  Balaam against them, that he should curse them; howbeit  our God turned the curse into a blessing." Neh. 13:1,2.  The exact way we find this important matter written in what Nehemiah calls "the book of Moses" is as follows: "An Ammonite OR Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the congregation of the Lord for ever; because they met you not with bread and with water in the way, when you came forth out of Egypt; AND BECAUSE THEY HIRED AGAINST THEE BALAAM the son of Beor of Pethor of MESOPOTAMIA to curse thee. NEVERTHELESS the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved thee. Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days forever." Deut. 23:3-6.  So you see that Balaam's homeland was Mesopotamia, which indicates the land between two rivers or waters, and describes what has been called the Fertile Crescent ­ that extremely fertile territory between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, where many great world empires of antiquity have arisen, prospered and flourished to the ruling of the whole world ­ from Nimrod's Babel, to Ur of the Chaldees, and mighty Babylon ­ to name only a few. And always ­ whatever the empire and whatever the age ­ idolatry and soothsaying, necromancy and wizardry, witchcraft and consulting with the dead, familiar spirits, etc.  All these ­ to be sure ­ thrive and have predominated over all other religions all over the world. But their Satanic beginnings seem to have been the Middle East, and particularly the regions of the Fertile Crescent; to wit: ­ Mesopotamia. And the Lord God Almighty has strictly warned against all such Black Magic, on penalty of death and consignment to Hell; to wit: "When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations. THERE SHALL NOT BE FOUND AMONG YOU ANY ONE that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, OR that useth divination, or an observer of times, OR an enchanter," ­ (i.e., sorcerer, the use of supernatural power over others, through the assistance of evil spirits, witchcraft) ­ "OR a witch" ­ (a woman who is believed to have dealings with the Devil), "OR a charmer, OR a consulter with familiar spirits, OR a wizard, OR a necromancer." ­ (i.e., one communicating with the spirits of the dead in order to predict the future; also called Black Magic Voodoo) ­ "For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord; and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee. Thou shalt be perfect (i.e., upright, sincere) with the Lord thy God. For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners; but as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do." Deut. 18:9-14.  The study of Black Magic, and the practice of various versions of the occult ­ (from African and Islands of the Caribbean/Floridian Voodoo, to VERY expensive séances for the mega-wealthy Shirley McClain-type idiots) ­ I say Black Magic is a universal ­ $multi-billion enterprise or business, even in this our so-called enlightened era.  Sunday, May 31, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Every time we see a black-frocked Roman Catholic or Greek Orthodox, or Episcopalian, et al.,  priest, we ought to think of Black Magic Voodoo nonsense. Beloved, just look upon the faces and  body language of these spiritualized and blind, hypnotized Catholic lemmings in full-demon-  worship mode. They are all marching over a cliff together ­ straight into Hell; to wit:  "But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up. Let them alone; they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch." (Mat. 15:13,14)  Indeed, all but God's Elect are smitten in one way or another with the Black Magic Voodoo bug. In his second attempt at cursing Israel, Balaam the world-famous soothsayer confessed that none of his Black Magic Voodoo ­ or anybody else's Black Magic Voodoo ­ would work on God's Elect; to wit: "He (GOD) hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob" ­ (i.e., Jacob = God's Elect. Now, there might be, and no doubt was, plenty of iniquity in Jacob, as with all God's Elect; but God has imputed to and in him the saving righteousness of Jesus Christ, such that God has never judicially "BEHELD" iniquity in Jacob) ­ "neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel;" ­ (i.e., same as above, a redundancy for emphasis); ­ "the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them." Num. 23:21.  What is the occasion for this joyous shouting? Is it not that God's Elect have assurance from evidence within and without that none can be found qualified or capable of laying anything to the charge of God's Elect. They are under the guns of the mighty Balaam, soothsayer par excellent, with a house full of gold as the "rewards of divination" in the offing; howbeit, no Black Magic Voodoo can compete with the blessedness of the man unto whom God Almighty imputeth righteousness; to wit: "But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works, Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin." (Rom. 4:5-8) (Here is a brief diversion: I have often said that this passage of Scripture ­ Rom. 4:5-8 ­ to my mind ­ should be used as something of a plumb line for measuring the theological accuracy of every other passage of Scripture; or, for that matter, it should be used to measure the Scriptural soundness of every other religious book and questionable writing.)  The contest between free grace via the imputed righteous of Jesus Christ, and Black Magic Voodoo ­ (i.e., free willism or man is a free moral agent and Christ died for every individual of mankind); ­ OR, the everlasting clash may for brevity be called Calvinism vs. Arminianism, and is played out on the plains of Moab. Three times Balaam attempted to curse Israel, and each time God caused him to bless Israel instead, and in doing so, this world-famous false prophet and Black Magic Voodoo monger UTTERED SOME OF THE MOST GLORIOUS PASSAGES OF FREE GRACE IN ALL THE BIBLE. Balak the king of Moab was furious; to wit: "And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together; and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times. Therefore now flee thou to thy place; I thought to promote thee unto great honor; but, lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honor." (Num. 24:10,11)  Sunday, May 31, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Beloved. Listen to this beautiful description or illustration of the doctrine of Predestination out of  the mouth of the heathen Balaam; to wit: God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of  man, that he should repent (i.e., change His mind); hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath  he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Behold, I have received commandment to bless; and  he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it." Num. 23:19,20. King Balak: "Come, curse me Jacob,  and come, defy Israel." ­ (defy here means to confront, stand up to, dare, challenge, withstand,  resist.) Balaam: "How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the  Lord hath not defied?" Num. 23:7,8.  Remember, the Lord is irreversibly and unforgivably angry with Moab for two reasons, to wit: 1) Moab did not meet Israel with bread and water to refresh them on their perilous way to the Promised Land; and, 2) Moab hired Balaam to curse Israel (Deut. 23:3; Neh. 13:2); to wit: "And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and spake unto him the words of Balak (king of Moab)." Num. 22:7. The stakes could not be higher; to wit: "And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho. And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites. And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many; and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel. And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that time. He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, There is a people come out from Egypt; behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me; Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me; peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land; FOR I WOT (i.e., FOR I KNOW ! ) that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom cursest is cursed." (Num. 22:1-6) I repeat, Beloved; the stakes could not be higher. Balak king of Moab was a desperate man. He had seen ­ up close and personal ­ how Israel had demolished, annihilated the two mightiest kings in the Middle East, Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan. And Og's kingdom and army boasted a company of giants; to wit: "For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man." (Deut. 3:11)  You recall how Rahab the harlot told the two spies of Israel that every heart in Canaan WEST of Jordan had melted from sheer terror when they heard what Israel had done to Sihon and Og EAST of Jordan. How much more frightened and terrified must Balak and his kingdom have been, on the EAST of Jordan, jam up next to Israel !  Furthermore, there were ancient family issues which aggravated and exacerbated the situation. Remember that Moab and Ammon were bastard children of incest between Lot and his two wild daughters, following the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah; to wit:  Sunday, May 31, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father. And the firstborn  bare a son, and called his name Moab; the same is the father of the Moabites unto  this day. And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi; the  same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day." (Gen. 19:36-38)  Always a sensitive matter between the descendants of Abraham and the descendants of Abraham's nephew Lot. Moreover, Moab appears to have outraged the Lord God, ­ (who is at all times tenderhearted respecting his loved ones on earth), ­ by denying the children of Israel minimal assistance when they desperately needed it, on their way to the Promised Land, after 430 years of the cruel Egyptian bondage and slavery. The eternal, guiding principle is set forth at Matthew chapters 10 and 25; to wit:  "He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward." (Mat. 10:40-42)  These solemn words, straight from the blessed mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, constitute the concluding words of a sermon which began with the Savior calling His twelve disciples unto Him and giving them "power against unclean spirits, to cast them out," (Mat. 10:1), which is to say that He gave them power over Black Magic Voodoo; which is to say in other words substantially what the world-famous soothsayer and false prophet Balaam said while under the influence of the Holy Spirit; to wit: "Surely there is NO ENCHANTMENT against Jacob." ­ (i.e., there is absolutely no Black Magic Voodoo that can prevail against God's Elect ­ "Jacob have I loved," Rom. 9:13 ­ "What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for US all, (i.e., all God's Elect) how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us." Rom. 8:31-34.)  I say, "Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel; according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought !" ­ (i.e., God has wrought salvation, by free grace alone, without any works whatsoever on the part of the creature ­ Amazing Grace! What hath God wrought ! He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel; the Lord his God is with him, and THE SHOUT OF A KING IS AMONG THEM ! What hath God wrought, indeed ! ) All else is vanity, and all others than God's Elect are doomed; to wit: "The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might; they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf. They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth; they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee. Who is a God like unto thee, that PARDONETH INIQUITY, AND PASSETH BY TRANSGRESSION OF THE REMNANT of his heritage." (Mic. 7:16-18)  Beloved. Your sins are all forgiven as the remnant of His heritage. I love you. Amen.  
