Sunday, June 13, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body; and BE YE THANKFUL. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, GIVING THANKS TO GOD AND THE FATHER BY HIM." Col. 3:15-17. Nothing is more pleasing and delightsome to God than the sincere and robust sacrifices of THANKSGIVING of His people; to wit: "Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the Lord, come near and bring sacrifices and THANK OFFERINGS into the house of the Lord. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and THANK OFFERINGS; and as many as were of a free heart burnt offerings." 2 Chr. 29:31. "And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the Lord. If he offer it for a THANKSGIVING, then he shall offer with the SACRIFICE OF THANKSGIVING unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried. Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread with the SACRIFICE OF THANKSGIVING of his peace offerings. ...And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for THANKSGIVING shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning." (Lev. 7:11-15)  "And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and THANK OFFERINGS, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel." (2 Chr. 33:16)  In fact, it is complete want of gratitude and THANKFULNESS to the Creator, on the part of apostate mankind, that God has ascribed as one (if not, THE) dominant cause of modern mankind's wholesale and speedy descent into total depravity, decadence, sodomy, bestiality, incest, and all other filthy sins of the flesh and spirit; to wit: "Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were THANKFUL; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore, God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves; Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshiped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature; and likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient; Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, Backbiters, hated of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful; Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure" ­ (i.e., by proxy, vicariously, or, consensually, rendering all mankind either fags or fagenablers) ­ "either commit such things as sodomy, bestiality, incest, etc., or have pleasure in them that do them." Rom. 1:21-32. Beloved, more should be said about Rom. 1:32; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them."  Sunday, June 13, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  A better reading would be, Who, well-knowing the righteous judgment of God, that they which commit  such things are well-deserving of death; and the word rendered "DEATH" is here used in its widest  known sense ­ namely, the uttermost of divine vengeance against sin. "NOT ONLY DO THE SAME,"  conveys the idea of a class of sodomite sinners, which, under the pressure of temptation, and in the heat of passion, they might do, even while abhorring it, and abhorring themselves for doing it, but "HAVE PLEASURE IN (OR `CONSENT TO') THEM THAT DO THEM." This word, "CONSENT TO," conveys the idea of eager, positive satisfaction in a person or thing ­ see the stoning of Stephen, and related, eager, bitter persecutions of the church, by Paul, beginning at Acts 7:57, et. seq.; to wit: "Then  they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, And cast him out of the city, and stoned him; and the witnesses laid down their clothes AT A YOUNG MAN'S FEET, WHOSE NAME WAS SAUL. And they stoned Stephen, calling on God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." You see, then, with what eagerness and satisfaction Saul, (later, Paul), CONSENTED to the persecution and death of Stephen, ergo:  "And Saul was CONSENTING unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles. And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him. As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women, committed them to prison. Therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word." (Acts 8:1-4)  And so you see, Beloved, those who are not fags, who do not engage in sodomitical practices themselves, "BUT HAVE PLEASURE IN THEM THAT DO THEM," literally CONSENT WITH THEM THAT DO THEM. And, the relish and eagerness ­ the positive satisfaction ­ with which Paul fought against and persecuted the church before his conversion ­ illustrates the accurate meaning of the term, CONSENT. The charge here brought against the fag-enabling world is, that they deliberately set their seal to such fag actions by encouraging and applauding the doing of them in others. Note also that this is the climax of the charges laid at the feet of every fag and fag-enabler in the world; to wit: Rom. 1:32. "And, with absolute certainly we can say that if the things are in themselves as black as possible, this settled, unblushing satisfaction at the practice of them, apart from the blinding effects of present passion, must be regarded as the darkest features of human depravity." (See, JFB, Jamison, Faucett & Brown.) Thus it is easy to see why the old preachers used to say that it is a far greater sin to be a fag promoter than it is to be a fag. Moreover, to illustrate the relish and zeal with which the so-called straight world of mankind is now holding the fag world ­ i.e., in positive satisfaction with sodomites, their persons, institutions and agendas ­ the apostle Paul further defines and describes what it means to have pleasure in a person or a thing, or "consent" to a person or a thing ­ by relating to King Agrippa how it was with him in persecuting the church with great enthusiasm; to wit: "I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem; and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities." (Acts 26:9-11)  The same kind of fanatical and insane, irrational enthusiasm Paul admits was driving him in his murderous persecutions of the church before his conversion ­ now drives straight America and the world in promoting the fag agenda, and in persecuting those who preach Bible truth in condemnation of fags and fagotry. And this is exactly the meaning of the words in the foreword or introduction of Paul's white paper on sodomy; to wit:  Sunday, June 13, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and  unrighteousness of men, WHO HOLD THE TRUTH IN UNRIGHTEOUSNESS."  (Rom. 1:18)  The meaning is that these ungodly and unrighteous people work hard, night and day, holding down,  choking, suppressing the Truth of God in the earth ­ as that Truth is published and maintained by such  as Westboro Baptist Church. These Workers of Iniquity work at jobs, occupations, professions,  businesses and employment to promote the fag agenda and to persecute WBC. For this reason these  demon-possessed people are called Workers of Iniquity ­ a term of art ­ in the Bible; to wit: "The  foolish shall not stand in thy sight; thou hatest all WORKERS OF INIQUITY." Psa. 5:5.  Trapp: "`have pleasure,' (v. 32) Or, they patronize, applaud, and approve, this is set last, as worst of all; it comprehends all kinds of CONSENT. To hold the bag is as bad as to fill it. The law of God requires not only our observation but our preservation, to cause others to keep it as well as ourselves; and to rebuke, at least by a cast of our countenance (as God doth, Psa. 80:16 - "It is burned with fire, it is cut down; THEY PERISH AT THE REBUKE OF THY COUNTENANCE") those that violate it. There is little difference whether thou commit sin or CONSENT TO IT."  Matthew Henry: "In the close he mentions the aggravations of the sins, v. 32. 1. They knew the judgment of God; that is, (1.) They knew the law. The judgment of God is that which his justice requires, which, because he is just, he judgeth meet to be done. (2.) They knew the penalty; so it is explained here: They knew that those who commit such things are worthy of death, eternal death: their own consciences could not but suggest this to them, and yet they ventured upon it. It is a very great aggravation of sin when it is committed against knowledge (Jas. 4:17 - "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin."), especially against the knowledge of the judgment of God. It is daring presumption to run upon the sword's point. It argues the heart much hardened, and very resolutely set upon sin. 2. They not only do the same, BUT HAVE PLEASURE IN THEM THAT DO THEM. The violence of some present temptation may hurry a man into the commission of such sins himself in which the vitiated appetite may take a pleasure; but to be pleased with other people's sins is to love sin for sin's sake; it is joining in a confederacy for the devil's kingdom and interest; they do not only commit sin, but they defend and justify it, and encourage others to do the like. Our own sins are much aggravated by our concurrence with, and complacency in, the sins of others."  Beloved. The old preachers and expositors outdo themselves in searching for words that are lively enough and powerful enough to do justice to an accurate exegesis of Rom. 1:32. And, for the most part, working with the signs of the times which they had, they concur with our own views remarkably closely. But remember, that those dear brothers of the long ago would have had no way of knowing short of direct Holy Ghost inspiration and prophesy, that by the 21st Century, sodomites would virtually control the world, and that those who opposed them in any way would be in mortal danger. There sits one of the demon-possessed in the White House, having pledged to be a so-called "Fierce Advocate" for sodomites, and to use the so-called "Bully Pulpit" of the White House ­ as well as all the powers of the Presidency ­ to guarantee so-called full and equal rights of so-called "gay" people. Beloved. Antichrist sits in the White House, (!)(!)(!); and the Man of Sin runs this nation and the world; known to the saints of God as "the rulers of the darkness of this world." Eph. 6; to wit: "Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with TRUTH." (Eph. 6:10-14)  Sunday, June 13, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Notice that no part of the armor is for the back, indicating that if we turn our backs to the enemy, we are  thereby exposed and are vulnerable to defeat. Of our dear Lord Jesus it is said:  "But with RIGHTEOUSNESS shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And RIGHTEOUSNESS shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins." (Isa. 11:4,5)  Beloved, there is not an ounce of TRUTH, SINCERITY, OR HOLINESS (i.e., [DIVINELYIMPUTED] RIGHTEOUSNESS) to be found in all the fags and fag-enablers in the world ­ combined. We swim in a sea of subtle fag lies. How many times has some slimy fag or fag-enabler attempted to palm off this popular fag lie; to wit: Yes, says he, sodomy may be a sin, but it's no worse than any other sin, like getting angry? Or, this one; to wit: There are lots of sins that are worse than sodomy, like murder? ­ All in support of the Big Lie, that IT'S OK TO BE GAY. The trouble with these amoral creatures is that God has given them up, as declared three times within five verses; to wit: Rom. 1:24 (to uncleanness); 1:26 (to vile affections); and 1:28 (to a reprobate mind). I say again, the trouble with these amoral fags is, that since God has given them up, they cannot repent, feel no shame for their sins, and cannot blush; to wit: "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, NEITHER COULD THEY BLUSH; therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." (Jer. 6:15) No one can reasonably deny that these passages of Scripture refer to and accurately describe sodomites and their enablers, or, fags and fag enablers. Moreover, it is a most remarkable word picture drawn by the infallible pen of the Holy Ghost. No one can refute all or any portion of these Scriptures; and all who have dared to try have only succeeded in betraying their own pitiful and abject stupidity and base ignorance. Sodomites deserve to be referred to as sodomites and dogs (Dt. 23:17,18 - "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a SODOMITE of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God."); as natural brute beasts (2 Pet. 2:12 - "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; ...But these, AS NATURAL BRUTE BEASTS, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption."); and as faggots and its contraction, fags (Amos 4:11 - "I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a FIREBRAND [i.e., FAGGOT, see Judges 15:4] a faggot plucked out of the burning; yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord;" and Jgs. 15:4,5. - "And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took FIREBRANDS, and turned tail to tail, and put a FIREBRAND in the midst between two tails. And when he had set the BRANDS on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.); I say that Bible preachers ­ and that whosoever will, as they say ­ have a right and a duty to refer to sodomites as sodomites, fags, faggots, dogs, brute beasts, brands plucked from the burning, etc.!  The Bible ­ the infallible Word of Almighty God ­ always trumps society's goofy mores. (!)(!)(!) Fags are certainly NOT GAY. Fags are ANYTHING BUT GAY. In fact, referring to fags as GAY, BASTARDIZES the English language. It is a horrible misnomer at least. Because fags, bearing on their countenance the mark of their sin and shame and the curse of God, cannot be anything but miserable; to wit: "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not." (Isa. 3:9)  I love you. Amen.  
