"Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world." 1 John 4:1 There was a story in the national media recently regarding how many people in this country so-called "self-identify" as being a fag. It was all over the Washington Post, USA Today, New York Times and many others about how the fags in this country make up only about 2% - 3% of the overall population. At least those that "self-identify" as being a fag. I'm not precisely sure what it is to "self-identify", since the only way to identify a fag is for them to tell you they are one, I'm guessing that self-identification is pretty much a requirement. It's not like a black man, or an amputee, or an old person who can all be identified pretty readily by their obvious characteristics. Perhaps you can self-identify as a zucchini, and gain protected class status in this country, I'm not really sure. There were a lot of things I found interesting about this story, like the fact that almost universally in the versions I read, it was identified as a quote "large-scale government survey on sexual orientation". What's interesting to me about that is that the survey had nothing to do with fagdom, really. The survey being used here was the National Health Interview Survey, which as I understand it is conducted every year by the Census Bureau to examine the health and behaviors of Americans. It was unique this year because for the first time there were specific questions about so-called sexual orientation, and it groups answers into fag-centric categories, so that researchers know that fags smoke a lot, and since they don't have kids to take up their time they spend more time in the gym than heterosexuals, but it was in no wise about fags. The attention this story got raised a question in my mind ­ "how does 3% of the population so dramatically impact the other 97% so that their agenda is on the forefront of every newspaper in america multiple times a week?" Think about this for a second. You have 3% or less of the population driving the agenda for 100% of the nation. Every day some court is declaring their rebellion against God's law on behalf of some pair of dykes or fags wanting to marry. The entire legal landscape is being reformed to afford special protections for people who "self-identify" themselves via a sexual act, and literally nothing more. Page 1|7  Put this another way. Some 15% of the population is left handed. We can identify a lefty pretty easily, by a visible outward indicator. We don't have any special laws for them. I know a few lefties who would like some special treatment for their left-handedness. But, we aren't making large swaths of industry re-work their products to support ambidextrous use! We aren't passing laws that make it illegal to choose not to cater to the special needs of left handed people! They should have more popular clout and more ability to stir the populace up by their sheer numbers alone to get some sort of recognition or gold star status as a minority! But here we have a population that is 1/5 the size of the lefties in this country, and they carry more clout than the majority. How does this happen? Several so-called conservative political pundits are using this story as an opportunity to rail against the media, since after all you can't turn on a TV show without there being some fag pushed in your face as the main character, with their so-called fag issues being a key story line, and how they are worshiped by all the other characters an obvious morality play, teaching us how we ought to treat these filthy brutes. You can't watch any news channel today without some talking head pontificating about how hateful people are who want this filthy minority of the population to keep their filth to themselves instead of walking naked down main street and demanding our children be offered up on their altar of lust and fornication. Clearly the media are to blame for the deep decline of the country. Of course the fact these pundits are part of the media seems to escape their attention most days, but that's another conversation. The media play a part in this, for sure, but they didn't start this downward spiral. The media propagates the zeitgeist, but I don't believe they set it. The churches set the zeitgeist. In Matthew 24, the disciples ask Christ "Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world" (verse 2) Twice in his answer Christ tells us that false prophets will come. Look answer to the disciples about what the signs of the end of days will be ­ twice Christ tells us that false prophets will arise, first in verse 11, "And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many", and then at verse 24 "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect". Any time something is mentioned more than once, especially in close proximity, it is an important things to take note of. Page 2|7  That's a lot of deception, and that word in verse 11 translated many is also translated much and more. The sense is almost everyone will be deceived. Deception will be the rule of the day in these last days. Christ warns us repeatedly in this discourse of the level of deception and not to be deceived. Look at this closely: Mat 24:4 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you. Mat 24:5 For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many. Mat 24:11 And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. Mat 24:24 For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Who comes in Christ's name but the so-called religious leaders, the false prophets? At the same time the truth of God's Word is being spread by this humble church, the churches across the world under the influence of our Adversary the Devil are racing to deceive the whole world. All 7 billion of them. Consider that this is what we are up against, and it continues to escalate as we draw closer and closer to that final day. These churches have been given over to Satan to use as a tool, just as the Pharisees and Sadducees were in Christ's day. The people look to the preachers to tell them what is right and moral, and of course Satan wove a very intricate fabric here to set this up. It of course began with "ye shall not surely die" (Genesis 3:4). He has worked it skillfully throughout all of human history to the destruction of all but 8 souls in The Flood, and he has spent the years since sowing a new crop of destruction and lies. We are approaching the end of his time to accomplish his ends and recruit his army. He is putting everything he has into this effort to build lies so strong, so overwhelming, so persuasive, our Savior tells us that if it were possible, they would deceive the elect. That is some strong deception. Satan, through the pulpits of this nation especially, has created a morality where priests are allowed to molest little children with no consequences. He has rent the fabric of marriage in two by very subtly altering the meaning of the word so marriage is no longer one man and one woman for life, but any union of any two creatures for any period of time they desire. Instead of being an inseparable, Page 3|7  mysterious and Godly bond between a man and a woman, marriage is now treated with a Lego brick mentality, where any piece is capable of being paired with any other piece in an infinite number of combinations to put together whatever design you like ­ in other words, no Kragle applied, and they're like really old Lego bricks from the 70s that have been put together and taken apart thousands, maybe tens of thousands of times and barely hold together so there isn't really a union of two souls at all, just kind of a bumping together of two pieces. When I read this news story and heard some of the comments being made about this topic it also made me double glad that we're working lots of new churches into our Sunday morning preaching schedule; it made me really happy because what I've realized with this new schedule is a renewed sense that the churches are where the battle really is. There's a dynamic going on here I'm not sure I've been able to put my finger on before, and I'm not sure I've quite got a full sense of it yet, but it goes something like this ­ When we're on these street corners not preaching at a church, these religious types don't think we're talking to them. Basically, they sit in their self-righteous yet heretical bubble and delude themselves that their tsking and hand wringing within their four walls over the "gay agenda" is obedience to God and that makes them righteous. Incredibly, many of these so-called churches think they're in the fight. How many times do we hear these people say "we preach against same-sex marriage" when we show up someplace new? How often do we hear from some person outside a church all about how they preach against sin! When we show up to preach to them, it is as shocking to them as a bucket of ice water to the face. Maybe some of you haven't experienced this, but I have several times now in this very city. We've been on the streets of Topeka for some 23 years, and some of these churches we've been preaching at lately act like they've never seen us before!!! They behave like people at out of town churches who really haven't ever seen us before! It's an amazing thing! And here's the reality of this situation ­ they don't see us!!!! They put the blinders of self-righteousness and religiosity on during the week so when they drive by us on the streets they can pretend our words don't apply to them. But when we enter into their sanctum, so to speak, by standing on the sidewalk outside their holiest of holies, where they go to get salve re-applied to their consciences, it's a giant !BAM! right on the forehead, and their consciences scream "AHHHH, THEY'RE PREACHING AT US! THEY SAID OUR PASTOR Page 4|7  IS A WHORE!!!! MAKE IT STOP!!! We're holy! We're righteous! We have a soup kitchen! We go on pilgrimage! We have missions in poor countries! We're God's children!" and on and on it goes like a badly warped record played at the wrong speed. We need to double down on this preaching at these churches. This is quality fighting we're doing when we stand outside these whore houses. It might not be quantity all the time, but this isn't a numbers game, per se. These churches are where the battle really is. This is Satan's stronghold in this battle and we must go confront him at the walls of his own battlement. The Abomination of Desolation will stand where he ought not BECAUSE OF THE CHURCHES! Remember too, it was the churches who came out first and stood against us with lying signs about God. I forget that some days. If possible, every church in this city should be regularly preached to whether they have 3 members or 3,000, and the work that Katherine and her helpers do to find these places and get their details is a great blessing we should all be very thankful for. The media propagates these evils, but the churches are the well-spring of them, and they must be made to know the messengers of God will not just sit by and let them go through life with their blinders on. We will shine the light of truth on their darkness, we will tear down their altars as Gideon and Josiah did, and we will not be silent about their abominations. Should we give the media or the government a pass on their complicity in this Satanic agenda to turn all the nations of the world away from God and toward the worship of his Antichrist? Absolutely not. However, if we had to choose one collection of places to preach to on the streets, and had no other options open to us, it must be the churches, in my opinion. The churches are supposed to be the place where truth is defended at all costs, where "teachers of good things" (Titus 2:3) speak edifying things to strengthen sinners in their striving against sin. Instead, the churches are full of those who "...will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables" (2 Timothy 4:3). It is a sign of the end days that they have turned their ears away from the truth and have turned to fables. Fables like "God loves everyone", and "it's okay to be gay", and "heaven is what we make of earth" and all that sort of unscriptural, earthly, conscience-pleasing, mental pain-relieving psycho-babble. Page 5|7  The fags didn't start this downward spiral within the churches and pull them away from the truth. They left the truth long before the fag juggernaut built up its momentum. When they left the truth of God's sovereignty and His absolute power, when they started worshiping the creature more than the creator, when the preachers left teaching obedience and repentance for the message of "I'm okay, you're okay", they opened the door. When they opened that door and removed all standards that God has set for His creation, then the lowest rung on the ladder of human depravity had an easy path to raise itself to the heights of human existence. That's how 3% of the population gains unfettered control of the other 97%. The churches have elevated them to their position of power, and the other estates have put their stamp of approval on that promotion and help keep the minority of filth in power. If you think I'm overstating the importance of the churches to our mission, examine for yourself how and where Jesus and the Apostles preached. Now the situation was slightly different fro them, since they were allowed to go into the building and preach the message, but they went where the conscience of the nation was being set. They preached in the synagogues! So if all the churches are abandoned to the doctrine of Satan, what is a soul to do, who wishes to worship God? We have no Shikinah today that lights down upon us as a pillar of cloud by day or fire by night, to provide that obvious unavoidable sign, saying to everyone who sees it that this is the place God has put His seat. So how do you find a church? While we don't have that mystical pillar, we certainly have plenty of other obvious signs and wonders to demonstrate that in this house, the truth has not been abandoned and as long as God has mercy on us it will not be. If you're genuinely out there looking for a church where God is worshipped, look at this place, and compare it to these dog kennels claiming to be churches today. Where else do you find a church that performs the ordinances of Scripture ­ baptism and the Lord's supper according to the word of Scripture? Are there divorced and remarried people in the membership of a church you're examining? Do they have or entertain women preachers? Do they exercise local church discipline, or choose rather to partake in a super-church structure where pastors must report up to bishops and cardinals and figure out where on the organizational chart they fit in? Do they baptize only confessed believers or talk of their inclusion of all regardless of their manner of life? Do they condemn these words we speak publicly? Page 6|7  These are all indicators of being a true church. And if you're not in a church, it's kind of tough to worship God in truth. If you aren't bearing the burdens of God's people, what are you doing with your life? If you aren't engaged in the wars of the LORD, what are you possibly engaged in of any worth? Let me put this as pointedly as I know how "He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad" (Matthew 12:30). If you're somewhere else, attending some weekly meeting trying to pass itself off as a church, and you KNOW it isn't preaching the truth, you are against God. If you are sitting by while the world declares battle against God Almighty and His word, and you aren't finding your five smooth stones and joining the army knowing that there is a cause, you're against God. If you are sitting in your house reading some Bible a few hours a day, and you don't mow your lawn or do the laundry on what you call the Sabbath, without getting a cup of water to the servants of God who are toiling in this field, then you're not with Him. And this message isn't just to the people who don't put their butts in the pews. You can sit in these pews every week and not be in the battle. Examine yourself and answer honestly whether you are engaged or not. So the message for this week is this ­ remember we have to try these spirits and the job is big because of there are many false prophets that have gone into the world to deceive it. And they're good at their job, so we must be good at ours. These false prophets have created a world where that 3% of the population can overpower the other 97% and control every facet of modern life. It is our job to counteract that with truth and to do it with energy and zeal. I love you all and thank you. Page 7|7  
