Sunday, July 7, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven." (2 Kgs. 2:11.)  This culminated the life on earth of a glorious example of all the elect of God, and who are further identified in various ways throughout Scripture, to wit: "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (1 Jn. 3:1-2.) "And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power. And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them. And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them. And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were talking with Jesus. And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid. And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him. And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves. And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man were risen from the dead. And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean. And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must first come? And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought. But I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him." (Mk. 9:1-13.)  Beloved, I am persuaded that we do not make nearly enough about those many instances throughout the scriptures, indeed, the great portion of the questioning of the Savior consisted of questions of the Savior of the resurrection and the unseen things available through the Holy Ghost; e.g., "What the rising of the dead should mean?" And one of the signs was the coming of Elijah. "Why say the scribes that Elias must first come? And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be SET AT NOUGHT. But I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they wanted to do, AS IT IS WRITTEN OF HIM." (Mk. 9:11-13.) "And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and the scribes questioning with them. And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to him SALUTED HIM." (Mk. 9:14-15.)  "There can be little room for any doubt that Elijah must have been thoroughly familiar with  scriptures, on how much the Lord had done for Israel, the signal favors he had bestowed upon them, he must have yearned with deep desire that they should please and glorify Him. But when he learned that this was utterly lacking, and as tidings reached him of what was happening on the other side of the Jordan, as he became informed of how Jezebel had thrown down God's altars,  slain His servants, and replaced them with the idolatrous priests of heathendom, his soul must have been filled with horror and his blood made to boil with indignation, for he was `very jealous for the Lord God of hosts. Would that more of such righteous indignation filled and fired us  Sunday, July 7, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  today." (A.W. Pink) Indeed, I have often thought of recent times that Westboro Baptist Church,  with her message of God's wrath and final doom, fills the role of Ahab and Jezebel, to wit:  "And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it. And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine. (And of Jezebel also spake the Lord, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel. [v. 23]) And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord. Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, And will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin." (1 Kgs. 21:17-22.)  Now see the doom of Jezebel which is substantially worse than that of her wicked husband Ahab. "Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of  Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his  father, the Lord laid this burden upon him; Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth,  and the blood of his sons, saith the Lord; and I will requite thee in this plat, saith the Lord. Now  therefore take and cast him into the plat of ground, according to the word of the Lord. But  when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden house. And Jehu  followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they did so at the going up of  Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there. And when Jehu was come to  Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it, and she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a  window. And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, who slew his master?  And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on my side? Who? And there looked  out to him two or three eunuchs. And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and  some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode her under foot.  And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king's daughter. And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her  than the skull, the feet, and the palms of her hands. Wherefore they came again, and told him.  And he said, This is the word of the Lord which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite,  saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel: And the carcase of Jezebel  shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel." (2 Kgs. 9:25-37.) Therefore, the vision of the bloody destruction of Ahab and Jezebel has been realized ­ for many centuries now the world has been warned of similar  destruction by blood-eating and blood-drinking dogs. Most of them warned by the likes of Elijah.  "Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments. Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Mal. 4:4-6.)  Beloved, it has increasingly occurred to various members of the humble Westboro Baptist Church that conditions of affairs today are strikingly familiar to those of Jezebel and Ahab -- without  hope and without God, in the world. None but a hairy, rough-hewn voice in the wilderness from  the hills would do. This is a request to consider us for the job. Here am I. Send me.  I love you. Amen.  
