Sunday, March 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "To whom coming, as unto a LIVING STONE, disallowed indeed  of men, but chosen of God, and precious, Ye also, as lively stones,  are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up  spiritual sacrifices," ­ (i.e., `By him therefore let us offer the  sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips  giving thanks to his name.' Heb. 13:15; `So will we render the  calves of our lips.' Hos. 14:2.), ­ "acceptable to God by Jesus  Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I  lay in Zion a CHIEF CORNER STONE, ELECT, PRECIOUS; and he  that believeth on him shall not be CONFOUNDED. Unto you  therefore which believe he is precious; but unto them which be  disobedient, the STONE WHICH THE BUILDERS DISALLOWED,  the same is made the head of the corner, And a stone of  stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at  the word, being disobedient; whereunto also they were  appointed." 1 Pet. 2:4-8.  Several profound and wonderful concepts, words and phrases are beautifully presented to our amazed and admiring eyes; to wit: "When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be ADMIRED in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day." 2 Thes. 1:10. So many amazing things are happening to this humble little church, I can hardly keep up with things. Shortly before the British Empire, the UK, United Kingdom, as they call that worldwide monstrosity nowadays ­ I say, shortly before they banned me, they also banned a member of the Dutch Parliament, because he's got a 15-minute film he's showing everywhere, blasting militant Islam, and the British say all the Muslims will be in an uproar.  Well, now, the Congress of the United States has got that Dutchman and his film over here, showing that dangerous film all over Capitol Hill and the United States. So I'm looking all around for my invitation to preach on Capitol Hill, and have my message endorsed for showing all over the United States, sponsored by the same U.S. Senators and Representatives that sponsored the Dutchman. I've been banned from the British Empire just like the Dutchman. It all depends on whose testimony in this life one chooses to believe. The apostle Paul says the Lord Jesus Christ is coming in power and glory with all his holy angels to eternally punish all those who were disobedient to the Gospel, and adds, that they were disobedient because they did not obey the Gospel, because they did not believe Paul's testimony. The same issue presents itself in our text. Whose testimony in this life are you going to believe? "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, DISALLOWED INDEED of (some) men, but chosen of God, and precious. WHEREFORE ALSO IT IS CONTAINED IN SCRIPTURE, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious; and HE THAT BELIEVETH on him shall not be confounded." (1 Pet. 2:4,6)  Sunday, March 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Why? Is the question. Why do some find themselves completely disposed to believe Paul's  testimony, and some not? Dr. Watts, said, "Why was I made to hear thy voice, And enter  while there's room; While thousands make a wretched choice, And rather starve than come?  The sovereign grace that spread the feast, Compelled me to come in; Else I had still refused to  taste, And perish'd in my sin."  This line of Scripture respecting this precious corner stone implicates the elect angels in a most unique and blessed way. Upon closer examination of the issue, Dr. Watt's verse really only begs the question; to wit: How? How did the sovereign grace that spread the feast COMPEL ME TO COME IN? Come now the angels, the elect angels ­ ("I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality." 1 Tim. 5:21.) ­ and those blessed, glorious, powerful creatures are all commissioned, ­ deputized if you will, ­ to see to it that not one of all God's elect from among humankind ­ not one, I say, stumbles or is in any way hurt ­ by that Divine Stumbling Stone; to wit: "Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked." (Behold, the masterful technique of those brilliant angelic beings, working at the level of the internal thoughts and musings of the reins and the heart) "Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling (same commentary)." Why?, Why?, Why? "FOR HE SHALL GIVE HIS ANGELS CHARGE OVER THEE, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against A STONE (i.e., THE BLESSED CORNER STONE)." (Psa. 91:8-12)  Beloved, if I have any least ability as a Bible student, and commentator, ­ an exegete, as the old schoolmen used to say ­ I would dedicate it all at such times as this. I see it so clearly. If only I could say it as clearly as I see it. Beloved, there is no way any of God's elect children can interpret this doctrine erroneously, so as to stumble and fall and make shipwreck concerning the faith ­ BECAUSE THE ANGELS ARE ACCURATELY INTERPRETING IT FOR THEM BY DIRECTING ALL THEIR INTERNAL THOUGHTS AND MUSINGS OF THEIR REINS AND HEART. And all the while I feel so acutely my duty to feed the Lord's dear sheep. You may see how important this subject is, by the verse that follows ­ reminding us of the gravity of this subject, and that we are engaged in a great battle with the old dragon; to wit: "Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder; the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet (i.e., conquer)." (Psa. 91:13)  Now connect this passage in Psalm #91 to the first chapter of Hebrews, the last verse; to wit: "Are they (the elect angels) not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:14)  What a beautiful rhetorical question, bearing its glorious answer in its teeth with it as it comes: a resounding YES! There are literally myriads of elect angels; and every last slap dab one of them is engaged in the business of giving the elect among mankind on earth a first-class  Sunday, March 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  education and course of professional, endless study in truthful, complex, and eschatologically-  sound theology. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who  shall be heirs of salvation?" Are they not? Yes they are. Heb. 1:14. There is something of  a mystery in the way that this vitally important Chief Corner Stone crops up unexpectedly here  and there, unannounced, all through the Scriptures. E.g., "The stone which the builders  refused is become the head stone of the corner. THIS IS THE LORD'S DOING; IT IS  MARVELLOUS IN OUR EYES." Psa. 118:22,23. This seems plainly to say that the very  mystery of its popping up unexpectedly and unannounced, bearing the imprimatur of angelic  educational activities among God's elect mankind ­ makes the Chief Corner Stone project all  the more "marvellous in our eyes." Psa. 118:23.  Many years ago I came upon a paper by, I think, John Brown of Edinburgh, Scotland, Professor of Exegetical Theology to the United Presbyterian Church (1754 - 1832). The essay was all about the Chief Corner Stone; it cleared up some of the mystery; but it added a little bit to the mystery. As best I recall, the main points went like this. David had died, and the time to build the Great Temple of God on Mount Zion in Jerusalem had come, using the materials David had acquired for the purpose during his lifetime. The Great Corner Stone was to be an exceedingly massive thing, weighing hundreds of tons, to be cut from the marble quarries of Lebanon to very, very tiny tolerances ­ fractions of a milligram. When finally cut, the stone was floated on a huge raft of gigantic logs down the eastern end of the Mediterranean sea, and then rolled overland on polished mammoth logs to Jerusalem. It may be that good king Hiram, king of Tyre, David's lifelong friend, helped with this huge project. At any rate, the project took several years to complete. When the stone was finally on the job site, the master builders in charge of construction reported flaws in the stone sufficient to render the stone unusable, and to require the cutting of a new stone, with all that such a thing entailed. Several years later, the new stone was finally prepared and delivered. At which time, upon closer inspection, it was discovered that THE FIRST STONE WAS VASTLY SUPERIOR TO THE LATTER EDITION! ! Heads rolled ! A new proverb, or saying of the wise, had entered the lexicon of Hebrew lore; to wit: "Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The STONE WHICH THE BUILDERS REJECTED, the same is become the head of the corner; this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?" (Matt. 21:42)  And, Beloved, note the dynamic context in which Jesus spoke ­ AND APPLIED ­ those words. "The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner; this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes!" Matt. 21:42. The Lord Jesus was teaching the people in the temple where the Chief Corner Stone was laid, when all of a sudden the vicious chief priests and elders showed up to challenge His authority to be teaching anybody anything; to wit: "And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority? And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things. The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?  Sunday, March 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say unto  us, Why did ye not then believe him? But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the people; for all  hold John as a prophet. And they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. And he said  unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things." Matt. 21:23-27.  Thereupon, our dear Lord Jesus launched upon His favorite ministerial style, using parables and similitudes to strike home His points and drive home His often fearful, eternal messages. E.g., "Hear another parable," He said to the chief priests and elders gathered there in the Temple with the people, "There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country;" ­ (Luke adds, `for a long time,'); ­ "And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, THAT THEY MIGHT RECEIVE THE FRUITS OF IT. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another." (2 Chron. 36:16; Neh. 9:26). "Again, he sent other servants more than the first; and they did unto them likewise. But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, THEY WILL REVERENCE MY SON. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, AND SLEW HIM."  Now, Beloved. It would be difficult to find a more outrageous set of circumstances, than those succinctly and simply and elegantly articulated by our Lord Jesus Christ in that parable. The single word that fits that parable like a glove is, OUTRAGEOUS ! Whoever those husbandmen are, they are, FIRST, guilty of blatantly violating the universal Law of the Fiduciary; to wit: Absolutely Strict, Uncompromising Fidelity ­ (i.e., "Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found FAITHFUL." 1 Cor. 4:2.).  And, SECOND, they are blatantly guilty of first degree, premeditated, lying-in-wait MURDER, without any justifying or redeeming factors. And, there are multiple lesserincluded offenses which are ­ and by right ought to be ­ absolutely chargeable to these murderous thugs. Now let us hear the pertinent question, from the Lord Jesus Himself; to wit: "WHEN THE LORD THEREFORE OF THE VINEYARD COMETH, WHAT WILL HE DO UNTO THOSE HUSBANDMEN?" Matt. 21:40.  Remember, the audience included chief priests, elders, and Pharisees ­ all of whom were included in those making up the targets of the Lord's parabolic sermon, and to whom he addressed the ultimate question, "WHAT WILL HE DO UNTO THOSE (GUILTY AND MURDEROUS) HUSBANDMEN?" Out of their own mouths do they condemn themselves; to wit:  "They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons." (Matt. 21:41)  Sunday, March 1, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  And then, curiously, the Lord immediately introduces "the stone which the builders rejected"  subject; to wit: "Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which  the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner; this is the Lord's doing,  and it is marvelous in our eyes." Matt. 21:42. "Did ye never read in the scriptures?" is the  Savior's rhetorical question that points us lovingly to Psa. 118:22, Isa. 8:14 and 28:16; to wit:  "The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. This is the  Lord's doing; it is marvelous in our eyes." The 29 verses of Psalm 118 provides a fitting  context for this sudden explosion of this subject into a situation that finds the psalmist, as the  representative of all God's elect, compassed about with hosts of enemies like "bees;" to wit:  "All nations compassed me about; but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them... They compassed me about LIKE BEES; they are quenched as the fire of thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them... I will praise thee; for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation. The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. This is the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes." (Psa. 118:10,12,21, 23)  And, see the context of Isa. 8:14, wherein the Chief Corner Stone is seen to be primarily the Destroyer of Impenitent Sinners, by ensnaring them and causing them to stumble, to fall, to be irreparably broken, to be snared in a trap or gin, and to be taken and cast into Hell; to wit:  "Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a STONE OF STUMBLING and for a ROCK OF OFFENCE to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken." (Isa. 8:12-15)  The Lord introduced Isaiah to the discussion about the Stone of Stumbling with these harsh words; to wit:  "For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people." (Isa. 8:11)  Sometimes we arrive at accurate notions of what a thing IS, by comparing it to what it IS NOT. The Chief Corner Stone is the Lord Jesus Christ ­ AS HE IS ­ NOT, AS HE IS NOT !  One of the reporters with the British TV crew that visited us a while back, has hit the nail on the head in an email he sent us last week. He closed with this statement; to wit: "All the hippy-zippi, flower-power, caring-sharing, long-haired softies in the world won't detract from Jesus Himself saying, `the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, And shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.'" He also now sees the difference between real gospel preachers and "happy-clappy preachers."  I love you.  Amen.  
