Sunday, March 30, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "What then? not-withstanding, whether in pretense, or  in truth, Christ is preached."  Phil. 1:15-18. "Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of good will. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds. But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel. What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." Phil. 1:15-18.  One of our loved ones got back from a preaching trip (i.e., a picketing trip) to Washington, DC, last Monday, late in the afternoon; and was tuned in to Fox TV for some background chatter as she caught up on a few things around the house ­ when all of a sudden she hears the old loudmouth Bill O'Reilly yakking up a storm in his usual bellicose fashion ­ about ­ what else? ­ Westboro Baptist Church! But, I'll let her tell you; to wit: "Okay, I'm out here catching up on my emails after a lovely day picketing with my Ben and David Church friends in Washington/Arlington ­ and what do my delighted ears hear? Yep ­ O'Reilly's out there blathering on about some young people who went into a catholic whorehouse on easter, and ­ to protest the war ­ threw some blood (or, substitute) around ­ and, they got arrested, and he wants them charged with felony trespass and 6 months in jail. He had a Chicago-based talk show host as his straight man, a youngish lawyer lady ­ and she blurts out: It's not entirely unlike those WESTBORO BAPTISTS! They protest at funerals while people's attentions are on a solemn occasion, to convey their displeasure about this nation's view on homosexuality ­ BINGO! ­ except they stay outside ­ DOUBLE BINGO! (Well my dear! Brother O'Reilly came unglued!) O'Reilly did NOT like that ­ he blundered about to this effect: Yes, but we don't give them coverage here. TRIPLE BINGO! Yikes (our loved one wrote) ­ someone forgot to tell his people ­ we're on there A LOT, and did I mention that it's the MOST WATCHED cable news show ­ three times a day ­ 8 million people ­ pure nectar, I tell you ­ what a balm for my spirit. You can see that good stuff at about 10:25 p.m. if you'd like, and/or at about 3:25 a.m. ­ I'm going to get me some more of that lovin'."  Now, Beloved, let's look at those BINGOs. BINGO #1 is to highlight the fact that the female lawyer from Chicago published (preached?) our message for us to O'Reilly's 8 million folks audience. She said that the Westboro Baptists protest (preach!) at funerals "to convey their displeasure about this nation's view on homosexuality." Yes indeed, Madam, and it's called the zeal of the Lord. E.g., "The ZEAL of thine house hath eaten me up." Psa. 69:9. And, "For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the ZEAL of the Lord of hosts shall do this." 2 Kgs. 19:3l. (Note: Generally the zeal of the Lord of hosts, means the zeal of his people supernaturally imparted unto them ­ His `hosts' ­ through whom He performs His mighty works.) "For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with ZEAL as a cloak." (Isa. 59:17) "My ZEAL hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words." (Psa. 119:139)  Sunday, March 30, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  America (and Europe) ­ and the world, really ­ has clearly forgotten twelve little words from their  Creator; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination." Lev.  18:22. Sodomy is so filthy, so unnatural, and so widespread throughout all mankind, ­ that it  SYMBOLIZES a total departure from God, and a total rebellion against God ­ by all of mankind ­  such that the end of the world and the Judgment Day is near. THAT is our message. And the  lady-lawyer on Bill O'Reilly's Show last Monday helped us deliver it when she said, "Those  Westboro Baptists protest at funerals to convey their displeasure (i.e., RIGHTEOUS ZEAL)  about this nation's view on homosexuality." (i.e., this nation's sinful, wholesale, Doom's Day  rebellion against God Almighty ­ SYMBOLIZED by their antichristic so-called, "view" on  sodomy).  To forsake God or blaspheme God is not nearly so great an insult to Him as to forget Him. And to forget his words is to forget Him. It is a great indignity. It is as much as to say, God is not even worth taking the time to reject Him, or to depart from Him, or to blaspheme Him. Truly, "My ZEAL hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words." Psa. 119:139. Truly, we can hardly bear to look upon the spiritual and moral scene of America and the world today. Upon a time, we read, that "Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting. And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers' money, and overthrew the tables; and said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father's house an house of merchandise. And his disciples remembered that it was written, The ZEAL of thine house hath eaten me up." Jn. 2:13-17. This explains why the Westboro Baptists do what they do ­ every day ­ 24/7/365. We have a vital message that we are determined to publish. Upon one occasion when the multitude hostile toward the disciples because of the words they were preaching, we read that, "some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him, Master, rebuke thy disciples. And he answered and said unto them, I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out." Lk. 19:39,40.  Beloved. That's exactly the way we feel about the message we believe God has given us, with Divine Orders to publish that message. The female lawyer on the O'Reilly Factor last Monday night ­ inadvertently ­ helped us to publish our message. Neither she nor O'Reilly intended it. But God intended it. This message is so vital, that God has shown us that America and the world needs our message ­ as we often say ­ more than they need oxygen to breathe, water to drink, and bread to eat. We believe that the signs of the time indicate to us that the end of the world is near. Jesus is coming soon. One of the tell-tale signs is a worldwide famine of hearing the word of God. Amos 8:11. "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." (Amos 8:11) I tell you, Beloved, there's a famine in the land. A worldwide famine of PREACHING the words of the Lord; ergo, there can be no HEARING the words of the Lord. For example, who is there alive in the world today that believes Christ died only for the very small remnant of mankind, His sheep, His Elect? I'll tell you who believes that ­ nobody. They never hear such doctrinal truths  Sunday, March 30, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  PREACHED. "Who hath believed our report?" cried out the old prophet, Isaiah, in a rhetorical  question that divides the sheep of God and the goats of Satan, down through the ages. Nobody! is  the answer; except the very small remnant of God's Elect. "And to whom is the arm of the Lord  revealed?" A redundancy, for effect. Isa. 53:1. Same doleful answer: Nobody! is the answer;  except the very small remnant of God's Elect. "Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very  small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah."  Isa. 1:9.  In total ignorance of what she and Bill O'Reilly had done, ­ in helping Westboro Baptists publish their message, ­ the lawyer-lady told 8 million listeners that "Westboro Baptists protest at funerals to convey their displeasure about this nation's view on homosexuality." And then the lawyer-lady added BINGO #2 ­ which was the first time to our knowledge that our lying media ­ (media totally dedicated to promoting sodomy and the perverts' way of life) ­ I say, for the first time that our lying national and international media broadcast this truth; to wit: "Except they (WBC) stay outside (i.e., we always stay quietly outside, a long way from the church or funeral home where the funeral is taking place)." The media generally lie about that vital matter; deliberately. The media generally say ­ falsely ­ that we disrupt funerals. Some media go further, and report ­ falsely ­ that we go into the funeral where the minister is officiating, and walk up and down the isles, waving our signs. It is a frightening fact that for 17 years we have been defamed ­ slandered and libeled ­ even as Jeremiah, in describing the condition of affairs in his day, just before the Babylonian Captivity ­ a type of the end of the world; to wit: "Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the Lord. Take ye heed (i.e., Watch out!) every one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders. And they will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth; they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity. THINE HABITATION IS IN THE MIDST OF DECEIT; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the Lord. Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit; one speaketh peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait." (Jer. 9:2-6,8)  Beloved, the arrowhead of that Jeremiad lies in these words of comfort to us; to wit: "THINE (OUR) HABITATION IS IN THE MIDST OF DECEIT." Have we not said many times that we swim in a sea of fag lies. We are prepared to testify against the media at the Great White Throne ­ even as we tell them now ­ that Big Media ­ at every level ­ are nothing but big, fat liars. LIARS, LIARS, LIARS. Yes. CLEVER LIARS. Beloved. I would not believe a word they say. They made Jeremiah's life miserable with their endless lies. Here's another of his Jeremiads; to wit: "I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil, ­ (i.e., the doom of Israel and the bloody, final destruction of Jerusalem) ­ because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. For I heard the DEFAMING of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it." Jer. 20:7-8,10.  Sunday, March 30, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  That is, one newspaper or TV broadcast will tell a big, fat, dirty lie about WBC, and 100 media news outlets will pick up that lie ­ and embellish upon it shamelessly ­ and 1,000 more outlets will pick up the embellished lie ­ and embellish upon it more ­ and so it goes. That's the meaning of the words in the Jeremiad, "REPORT, SAY THEY, AND WE WILL REPORT IT." Jer. 20:10. (Incidentally, a Jeremiad is a lamentation or tale of woe, and the word derives from the prophet Jeremiah and his writings.) We NEVER DISRUPT FUNERALS. We never go in to funerals. But the media say we do ­ so that mammoth lie prevails around the world. But the lawyer-lady from Chicago ­ on the Bill O'Reilly Show last Monday ­ came out and plainly told the Fox TV audience that WBC picketers "ALWAYS STAY OUTSIDE," ­ (and, I might add, we always stay a long way off) ­ when we picket funerals. That's why BINGO #2 is refreshing ­ for once, somebody in Big Media told the truth about WBC ­ VERY A-TYPICAL. That brings us to BINGO #3. Which is Bill O'Reilly's sick initial response to the young lawyer-lady's mention of Westboro Baptists. Remember what that loudmouth idiot said? He said, "YES, BUT WE DON'T GIVE THEM COVERAGE HERE!" Amazing! Get the picture, Beloved. Two of the hottest media wonks in the business today. The young lawyer-lady has her own daily radio talk show in the huge Chicago market. She has her finger on the pulse of current American activity; and she obviously knows the straight/skinny about WBC and WBC's message and WBC's MO (that is, WBC's Method of Operating). She probably didn't know that her trip to The O'Reilly Factor last Monday would involve her with preaching WBC's holy message, and defending WBC's Method of Operating against the lies of the media ­ AND ­ exposing Bill O'Reilly for the fraud he really is; to wit: a so-called hotshot newsman bragging about not being interested in the news: "We don't give them coverage here," indeed. When the female told the world that WBC pickets funerals to convey their displeasure about this nation's promotion of the fag agenda ­ except they stay outside the funerals to do it, she was exalting our message from God, whether she knew it or not. The Holy Ghost said, "Whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." Phil. 1:18. To the extent of his power, ­ (i.e., power temporarily to include or exclude this or that matter for coverage on the doomed O'Reilly Factor) ­ I say, to the extent of his meager power, Bill O'Reilly has lifted up his hand against the Lord and His servants, attempting to silence the preaching of God's Word; to wit: "We don't give them (WBC) coverage here." God Almighty has given a message to WBC, with orders to publish that message. Mr. O'Reilly says, ­ (with full knowledge that the duty of news people is to cover the news) ­ Mr. O'Reilly says, "We don't give them coverage here." Well, those words will ring in Mr. O'Reilly's ears throughout all eternity ­ like the worm that eats on him never dies, and the fire that burns him is never quenched. Mk. 9:43-48. However, despite O'Reilly's malice and his malicious policies of discrimination against WBC ­ and, as illustrated by what happened on his program last Monday night with the young lawyer-lady ­ O'Reilly was providentially compelled to preach the holy message of WBC ­ even though he did it "of contention and strife." "What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached." Phil. 1:15,16,18. Amen.  
