Sunday, December 19, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence. And when ye come into an house, salute it. And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city ­ (i.e., than for Topeka, than for Kansas, than for the United States of America, than for the inhabited earth). Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men;" ­ (i.e., "Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord... Beware of dogs [sodomites Deut. 23:17,18], beware of evil workers [workers of iniquity, all the reprobates and non-Elect], beware of the concision [false religions with their mantras and rotes]".Phil. 3:2) ­ "But beware of men; for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. FOR IT IS NOT YE THAT SPEAK, BUT THE SPIRIT OF YOUR FATHER WHICH SPEAKETH IN YOU." Mat. 10:11-20.  God has never left the world totally without a human being through whom to speak His Words in utmost fidelity, love and affection, and supernatural accuracy. "Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart; for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts." Jer. 15:16. And, usually, the arrangement between the Lord and His spokesmen is a happy one, partaking of the nature of a vow and a covenant or mutual agreement; to wit: "As for me, this is my COVENANT with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever." Isa. 59:21.  I believe that the extremely fortunate person who is chosen to deliver the words of the Almighty to the sons of men, is more than delighted to bind himself to the covenant with holy vows, that more or less follow him through life and into eternity; to wit: "If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? (No!) Offer unto God THANKSGIVING; AND PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE MOST HIGH; And call unto me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." Psa. 50:12-15. "When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back; this I know; for God is for me. In God have I put my trust; I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. THY VOWS ARE UPON ME, O GOD; I will render praises unto thee. For thou hast delivered my soul from death; wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?" (Psa. 56:9-13)  "From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed; lead me to the rock that is higher than I. For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever; I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah. FOR THOU, O GOD, HAST HEARD MY VOWS; thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy name. So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, THAT I MAY DAILY PERFORM MY VOWS." (Psa. 61:2-8) "When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou hast vowed. Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay." (Eccl. 5:4,5)  Sunday, December 19, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, the history of Westboro Baptist Church is a most remarkable event in the annals of the  world. For more than half a century (55 years) the unvarnished word of God has gone forth from this humble little house ­ pursuant to the vows and covenants of her people with the Trinity. We believe that when we speak and warn mankind ­ upon the authority of Holy Scripture ­ (as it was in the days of Noah, and as it was in the days of Lot, and remembering Lot's wife, Gen. 19) ­ YOU  HAD BETTER TAKE EARNEST HEED AND PAY CLOSE, UNDIVIDED ATTENTION (!)(!)(!) "For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you." Mat.  10:20. When we received our Grand Commission as Royal Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, our  powers were plenipotentiary, to bind men and demons in the Name of the King: to wit:  "That God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; AND HATH COMMITTED UNTO US THE WORD OF RECONCILIATION. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: WE PRAY YOU IN CHRIST'S STEAD, BE YE RECONCILED TO GOD." (2 Cor. 5:19,20) Note: Ours is the ONLY Word of Reconciliation. "Therefore I endure all things for the Elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory." 2 Tim. 2:10. It is thus clear, that we go forth happily confident that all God's Elect will sooner or later accept our offer of reconciliation, and will acknowledge that ours is in fact the ONLY Word of Reconciliation. The reprobates of mankind ­ the non-Elect ­ will carp and cavil and obey not the truth ­ but will obey unrighteousness ­ all by being contentious with us, hating us, and reproaching us ("If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, and the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you." 1 Pet. 4:14. "As it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me." Romans 15:3; Psa. 69:9. "And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved." Mat. 10:22.)  Beloved. Our dear Lord Jesus has affixed the most dreadful of woes to those who would spurn us and reject our message as the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; to wit: "And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city." (Mat. 10:14,15) Think of it. Beloved. Historic Sodom ­ quintessential evil ­ "set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Jude 7. And yet, to reject God Almighty's Ambassadors just one time is considered by God a greater evil than the accumulated moral filth of Sodom and Gomorrah; and will accordingly be punished more severely. To paraphrase: "Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for that city (i.e. for any and all cities, countries, lands, etc.; i.e., Topeka, Kansas, USA, Europe, South America, Africa, Asia, Australia, etc.) Mat. 10:15. Amazing. And then, apparently, so weighty a matter is this, that the Lord Jesus returned to it in a slightly different context a short while later; to wit: "Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, BECAUSE THEY REPENTED NOT. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! FOR IF THE MIGHTY WORKS, WHICH WERE DONE IN YOU, HAD BEEN DONE IN TYRE AND SIDON, THEY WOULD HAVE REPENTED LONG AGO IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES. But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." (Mat. 11:20-24)  Sunday, December 19, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  Now to paraphrase the account in Matthew 11, where the Savior upbraided three specific cities for not repenting despite mighty works being done in them. Recall that no specific city was named in another account in Matthew 10, where the soul-damning sin was not receiving the disciples nor hearing their words. The three specific cities condemned by Christ were, Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum. The attention given by Christ to this matter is extensive, and warrants our attempts to discover what spiritual lessons we should draw ­ and apply ­ thereto. In other words, how ought we to divide this glorious Word of Truth? ("Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH." 2 Tim. 2:15). To wit. "And thou, (Topeka), which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee (Westboro Baptist Church), had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." Mat. 11:23-25.  In other words, on the authority of God's Word, WBC declares to the people of Topeka, Kansas, that you hypocrites, despite your protestations of piety, are far more sinful and depraved than the filthy city of ancient Sodom was at the time of their overthrow in fire and brimstone in 1898 B.C. Indeed, Topeka is thrice-cursed; to wit: 1) You refused to receive WBC nor hear our Words - Mat. 10:14; 2) You refused to repent in sackcloth and ashes - Mat. 11:21; and, 3) You refused to glorify God for the many mighty works which were done in you - Mat. 11:23; to wit: "And thou, Capernaum" ­ (i.e., or, Topeka, Kansas, America, London, Europe, Africa, Asia, South America, Australia, the world) ­ "which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee" ­ (i.e. by God, working in and through Westboro Baptist Church) ­ "HAD BEEN DONE IN SODOM, it would have remained until this day," ­ (yes, and with the equivalent of WBC in a large, well-attended meeting house on a downtown street corner, at Fire and Brimstone Streets) ­ "But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." Mat. 11:23,24. And now, Beloved, please take note of exactly what our dear Lord Jesus Christ does and says immediately following those startling and profound words; to wit:  "At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, BECAUSE THOU HAST HID THESE THINGS from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." (Mat. 11:25,26)  Just exactly, WHAT things have the Lord God hid from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes? That by not receiving the preaching of the Westboro Baptist Church, nor hearing their Words, ­ warmly and happily and thankfully, ­ the people of Topeka have made themselves worse sinners than the people of Sodom. Get it through your thick heads, Topeka: It is a very great sin NOT TO RECEIVE the gentle souls of WBC, NOR TO HEAR our words. It makes you guiltier than the souls of ancient Sodom in all their filthy degeneracy, depravity, debauchery, & decadence; you will pay the price of suffering in Hell, which will be more intolerable than the pain of suffering in Hell along-side your fellow sodomites and rebels against God; to wit:  "And he (i.e., Jesus) said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place. AND WHOSOEVER SHALL NOT RECEIVE YOU, NOR HEAR YOU, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city. And they went out, and preached that men should repent." (Mk. 6:10-12) Now, Beloved, does not Luke's account of these remarkable things ratchet up the certain pain and peril of those who receive not the Lord's holy messengers, nor hear their words warmly and  Sunday, December 19, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  thankfully? But who, rather, in point of fact, DESPISE THE LORD'S MESSENGERS AND THE  LORD'S MESSAGE. To wit: "But into whatsoever city ye enter," ­ (say, for example, Topeka,  Kansas, USA, Planet Earth) ­ "AND THEY RECEIVE YOU NOT, go your ways out into the  streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off  against you; notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.  But I say unto you, THAT IT SHALL BE MORE TOLERABLE IN THAT DAY FOR SODOM,  THAN FOR THAT CITY...And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust  down to hell. HE THAT HEARETH YOU HEARETH ME; AND HE THAT DESPISETH YOU DESPISETH ME; AND HE THAT DESPISETH ME DESPISETH HIM THAT SENT ME."  Lk. 10:10-16. Beloved, the gravity of the matter I am preaching about today is highlighted by its  amazing context in Matthew, chap. 10, and Luke, chap. 10. To wit:  "And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child; and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Mat. 10:21,22)  Glorious things are promised to God's Elect, both in this life and in the world to come. An  inheritance that is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away; reserved in Heaven for you,  who are kept by the power of God; and which includes a new body that is powerful, beautiful, agile, spiritual, and impassible (incapable of suffering pain or discomfort); to wit: "Beloved, now are we  the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when he shall  appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 1 Jn. 3:2,3. Only such heavenly and eternal rewards as  these, impressed upon the minds and hearts of the righteous by the indwelling Holy Ghost, can  operate to keep the embattled and afflicted pilgrim happily on the narrow way to glory and to God;  to wit:  "But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is A REWARDER of them that diligently seek him." (Heb. 11:6)  Beloved, from our view of things, His yoke is easy and His burden is light; indeed our afflictions are altogether, incomparably light; to wit: "For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor 4:16-18)  We have seen that to refuse to receive the messengers of God, nor to hear their Words, signifies greater sin than that of Sodom, and will be punished more severely in Hell forever. Mat. 10:15.  Westboro Baptist Church is prepared to testify against the inhabitants of Topeka, Kansas, USA, and Planet Earth, ­ that we and our words as messengers of God, have been totally rejected by all. You know us. For many years we have been on your streets and in your faces, reminding you of God's claims upon your lives and destinies ­ to the extent that you have violently persecuted us, to your everlasting shame and punishment. Our pulpit is open 24/7/365 to preach God's Truth to you. Similarly, our baptismal waters are flowing for the truly penitent who accept the counsel of God against themselves; to wit: "BUT THE PHARISEES AND LAWYERS REJECTED THE COUNSEL OF GOD AGAINST THEMSELVES, BEING NOT BAPTIZED OF HIM (i.e., JOHN)." (Lk. 7:30)  I love you. Amen.  
