Sunday, May 25, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight  for mount Zion...As birds flying, so will the Lord  of hosts defend Jerusalem." Isa. 31:4(b), 5(a).  Beloved, these are but a few of many such bold, unconditional assurances we have from our Father, that He will keep that which we committed unto Him against that day (2 Tim. 1:12), and that He will keep us from falling away and present us faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy (Jude 24). These are fair samplings of such "exceeding great and precious promises; that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust." 2 Pet. 1:4. Wonderful, pithy doxologies; e.g.: "And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever." (2 Tim. 4:18) "Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen." (1 Tim. 1:17) "Which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate (Sovereign), the King of kings, and Lord of lords; Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see; to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen." (1 Tim. 6:15,16) "Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means. The Lord be with you all." (2 Thes. 3:16) "And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it." (1 Thes. 5:23,24) "Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen." (Phil. 4: 20) "Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen." (Eph. 6:23,24) "But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. From henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen." (Gal. 6:14-18) "Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you. All the saints salute you. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen." (2 Cor. 13:11,13-14)  Sunday, May 25, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.  The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. My love be with you all in Christ  Jesus. Amen." (1 Cor. 16:22-24)  "Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, MADE KNOWN TO ALL NATIONS for the obedience of faith; To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen." (Rom. 16:25-27)  Beloved, these glorious doxologies ­ i.e., these ecclesiastical forms of praise to God our Father ­ are in gratitude and praise to Him for saving us ­ i.e., for delivering us from every evil work (or, from every device of Satan designed to destroy us), and for preserving us throughout our pilgrim journey ­ all the way to His heavenly kingdom and our everlasting habitations (Lk. 16:9; to wit: "And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations."). Beloved, He will keep us, watch over us, fight for us, save us out of every single one of Satan's plots, and the devices of the world and the devil to kill and destroy us.  Remember the words of John Owen, that whatever else is going on, never forget that the ULTIMATE AIM of Satan and the world of these vile earth-dwellers all around us ­ I say, their ultimate aim ­ ALWAYS ­ is the death of all God's Elect and the "utter destruction of the church;" and, "For, CONSIDER HIM (i.e., our dear Lord Jesus) that endured such contradiction of sinners" (i.e., slanders and oppositions of every conceivable kind) "against himself" (i.e., immediately, directly, in-your-face) "lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood (i.e., death, as of Christ dying on the cross; you are not dead yet), striving against sin." Heb. 12:3,4.  And, Beloved, remember that this great conflict, that we in this humble church are engaged in, is the very essence of the Gospel ­ and is irrefutable, irrefragable evidence (proof positive) that our calling and election is sure. 2 Pet. 1:10. To wit: "Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner;" (i.e., the aging apostle was falsely imprisoned by the sodomite perverts running the mighty, but doomed, Roman Empire) "but be thou partaker of the AFFLICTIONS OF THE GOSPEL according to the power of God; Who hath saved US, and called US with an HOLY CALLING, not according to OUR works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given US in Christ Jesus BEFORE THE WORLD BEGAN, But is now made manifest" ­ (openly revealed for the whole world to see who the CALLED ­ THE ELECT ­ are, and the Gospel that was given to ONLY THEM before the world began) ­ "by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel; Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles." (Note here that any preacher preaching "another gospel; Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ" ­ [i.e., would sodomize the Gospel with Arminianism, god-loves-everybody-ism, and free-will-ism] ­ I say, any preacher preaching "another gospel" is a Hell-bound heretic.) "For the which cause I also suffer these things (i.e., the sine qua non of salvation); nevertheless I am not ashamed; for  Sunday, May 25, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able" (a meiosis ­ i.e., a severe  understatement for dramatic effect ­ if ever there was one) ­ meaning, not that He is barely  "able", but that all the Sovereign Power of an Almighty God is dedicated, devoted, and solemnly  PLEDGED UNDER OATH ­ "to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day."  2 Tim. 1:8-12.  Beloved, what is it that we, like Paul, have committed unto Him against that (Great Judgment) Day? Is it not ­ in a word ­ EVERYTHING? Spirit, soul, body, goods, reputation, life, time ­ EVERYTHING. And does anybody think that the Righteous God will default on His Pledge? No! A thousand times, No! When they are in any kind of danger, the Lord God of hosts will leave His throne in Heaven and come down to Earth to fight for His loved ones in His Church Militant ­ and, as birds flying (state-of-the-art supersonic fighter-planes and bomber- planes laden with stateof-the-art nuclear weapons and bombs) ­ I say, when His Loved Ones in His Church Militant are threatened with harm in any way, the Lord God has pledged ­ as Heaven's war-birds flying ­ to defend them. The Lord's pledge to take care of us in all circumstances is ratified in Scripture many times in many ways ­ and I like them all. But I recently have taken a fancy to the one in Isaiah 31:4(b) and 5(a), which is the text of this sermon; to wit: "So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion... AS BIRDS FLYING, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem." Isa. 31:4(b) and 5(a).  Champion Football Coach Vince Lombardi used to say that the best defense is a good offence. But these supersonic War-Birds of the Lord fly both ways. Their immediate context involves a total destruction of a mighty Assyrian army that had laid siege to ­ and was threatening the imminent and utter destruction of ­ Jerusalem (the church, God's Holy Remnant). Things looked bad. FAMOUSLY, HISTORICALLY BAD. It was the stuff of music and poem ­ notably, Lord Byron's famous poem, titled, The Destruction of Sennacherib's Host; to wit (I digress. Lord Byron was not a Bible man; in fact he was a whoremongering drunk; and he certainly had no interest in knowing that the Lord's supersonic War-Birds were flying that night.):  "The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold, And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold; And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea, When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee. Like the leaves of the forest when Summer is green, That host with their banners at sunset were seen; Like the leaves of the forest when Autumn hath blown, That host on the morrow lay withered and strown. For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast, And breathed in the face of the foe as he pass'd, And the eyes of the sleepers wax'd deadly and chill, And their hearts but once heaved, and for ever grew still! And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide, But through it there roll'd not the breath of his pride; And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf, And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf. And there lay the rider distorted and pale, With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail; And the tents were all silent, the banners alone, The lances uplifted, the trumpets unblown. And the widows of Ashur are loud in their wail, And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal; And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword, Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord!"  Sunday, May 25, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  Now, hear how the Holy Spirit records the incident. First, get the picture of Jerusalem under  Assyrian siege by 185 thousand cruel, seasoned, crack troops led by bloody King Sennacherib.  Hezekiah prayed to the Lord, and the Lord said, "That which thou hast prayed to me against  Sennacherib king of Assyria I HAVE HEARD." Beloved, the birds are now flying.  "Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city (WBC), nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, AND SHALL NOT COME INTO THIS CITY (WBC), saith the Lord. For I will defend this city (WBC), to save it, for mine own sake... And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand; and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead." (2 Kgs. 19:32-37)  And so, as always, the Lord faithfully kept His solemn pledge to defend His oppressed people. The birds were flying. "So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion (WBC) ...As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem (WBC)." (The church described spiritually: "But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels." Heb. 12:22.) And see, Isa. 31:4(b) and 5(a). Beloved, there is no way that John Gill and other old-time puritan expositors could interpret Isaiah 31:5 correctly ­ about those birds flying. They could have no knowledge of airplanes, let alone supersonic, nuclear-armed War-Planes. State-of-the-art military assets. These are truly remarkable days we are living in, Beloved. And these War-Planes can fight OFFENSIVELY as well as DEFENSIVELY. And, Remember Coach Lombardi's bit of football wisdom, that a good OFFENSE is the best DEFENSE.  Westboro Baptist Church is supernaturally called of God in these last of the last days to do more than sit around, passively twiddling our thumbs, while the nation and the world rush madly and blindly to the Great Day of Judgment and thereafter to Hell. No. There is abundant scriptural evidence that the Great Captain of the hosts expects to use Westboro Baptist Church as His battle ax and His weapons of war and His sharp threshing instrument having teeth to wage the Battles of the Lord and to thresh the mountains of sodomy and idolatry and beat them small for His mighty whirlwind to scatter to the four winds. Isa. 41:15,16. Listen to these words that describe the conditions of things when America ­ (symbolized by Babylon) ­ is destroyed by the Lord, in a majestic display of His absolute Sovereignty, Power, Wisdom, Understanding, and Wrath; to wit: "For the Lord hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon (think, America). O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness (think, America). The Lord of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillars; and they shall lift up a shout against thee." (Think, China, India, Asia, Africa, South America, etc.) "He hath  Sunday, May 25, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched  out the heaven by his understanding. When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters  in the heavens; and he causeth the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh  lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures. Every man is brutish by  his knowledge; every founder is confounded by the graven image; for his molten image is  falsehood, and there is no breath in them. They are vanity, the work of errors; in the time of  their visitation they shall perish. The portion of Jacob," ­ (i.e., the Lord God, "The Portion of  Jacob" being a Name He loves to take unto Himself, meaning that the Lord is the Portion of His  Elect ­ as the song has it, "Thou my everlasting portion, more than friend or life to me."):  "The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of all things; and Israel (God's Elect) is the rod of his inheritance; the Lord of hosts is his name. THOU (WBC) ART MY BATTLE AX and WEAPONS OF WAR; for WITH THEE will I break in pieces the nations, and WITH THEE will I destroy kingdoms; And WITH THEE will I break in pieces the horse and his rider; and WITH THEE will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider; WITH THEE also will I break in pieces man and woman; and WITH THEE will I break in pieces old and young; and WITH THEE will I break in pieces the young man and the maid; I will also break in pieces WITH THEE the shepherd and his flock; and WITH THEE will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and WITH THEE will I break in pieces captains and rulers. And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea (think, America) all their evil that they have done in Zion (Westboro Baptist Church ­ Heb. 12:22) in your sight, saith the Lord." (Jer. 51:12-24)  Beloved, has not the cruel persecution of our little church by the United States been done "IN YOUR SIGHT?" Meaning, before our very eyes? Next week we will celebrate the 17th Anniversary of our daily picketing ministry on the mean streets of America ­ from coast to coast, border to border ­ 884 continuous weeks ­ 40 pickets per week ­ more than 35,000 total pickets ­ at our own expense ­ (as a matter of strict, Bible-based principle, we neither ask for nor accept contributions) ­ in 593 cities, in all 50 states (yes, Hawaii and Alaska included). Beloved, Westboro Baptist Church has amassed a huge quantity of first-hand, thoroughly documented, eyewitness evidence (even "all their evil that they have done in Zion IN YOUR SIGHT, saith the Lord" ­ Jer. 51:24). For 17 years we have been mercilessly persecuted by the lawless, filthy, criminal citizens of this godless country ­ all of whom are wide- awake to this fact, and are wellaware of what they have done, and are doing. The members of Westboro Baptist Church are competent, first-hand, face-to-face, eyeball witnesses ­ ready, willing and able to give testimony against you, America, before the Great White Throne on the Great Day of Judgment. We will begin our 18th year of daily picketing next week, and we will accumulate additional evidence against you ­ until Jesus comes. And when I say daily, I mean daily, picketing. I mean daily ­ FOR 17 YEARS! On your Hellish, mean, lawless, godless, filthy streets ­ as it was in the days of Sodom. I do not mean ALMOST daily, or VIRTUALLY daily, or PRACTICALLY daily ­ or any other qualifying word. I mean DAILY. What a record! Beloved, THAT is what it means to be God's "BATTLE AX." And THAT is what it means to be God's "WEAPONS OF WAR." Jer.  Sunday, May 25, 2008 page 6  Sermon Outline  51:20. And THAT is what it means to be God's "new sharp threshing instrument having teeth,"  with which to "thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and make the hills as chaff." Isa.  41:15. Beloved, we wage this spiritual warfare in the Name of God Almighty. I say spiritual  warfare:  "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; (For the  weapons of our warfare are not carnal, BUT MIGHTY through God to the  pulling down of strong holds;) Casting down imaginations, and every high thing  that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity  every thought to the obedience of Christ." 2 Cor. 10:3-5.  We are commanded to "take to ourselves the whole armor of God, that we may be able to resist and stand," Eph. 6:13; to "watch, to stand fast in the faith, to quit ourselves like men, to be strong," 1 Cor. 16:13. And it is the constant, vigorous acting of faith that is required in all these things. Beloved, can you just visualize the Lord of hosts leaving His throne in Heaven and "coming down to fight for mount Zion? (i.e., Westboro Baptist Church)." This is exactly what He said He would do in Isa. 31:4(b). Can you just visualize the Lord's state-of-the-art, supersonic War-Birds flying, buzzing all around this humble church, a symbol or similitude, standing for the Lord God of hosts always and mightily at the ready with infinite fire power to defend Westboro Baptist Church? This is exactly what He said He would do; to wit: "So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion (WBC)...As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem (WBC)." Isa. 31:4(b) and 5(a).  It is faith ­ God's supernatural gift of FAITH to all His Elect ­ that stirs up and engages spiritual courage, resolution, patience, prayer, perseverance, all preserving graces and duties. FAITH! MIGHTY FAITH! "The faith of God's elect." Titus 1:1. "But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." Heb. 11:6. Beloved, we are told of a great gathering of our friends, who have gone on to Heaven from the bygone years, looking on as our witnesses and to encourage us in our struggles; to wit: "Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses...let us run with patience the race that is set before us." Heb. 12:1.  John Owen says, "So it is with us in our patient perseverance; all the saints of the old testament do as it were stand looking on us in our striving, encouraging us unto our duty, and ready to testify unto our success with their applauses. They are all placed about us unto this end; we are `compassed' with them. And they are so in the Scripture; wherein they, being dead, yet see, and speak, and bear testimony. The Scripture hath encompassed us with them; so that when we are in our trials, which way soever we look in it, we may behold the face of some or other of these worthies looking on us, and encouraging of us. And it is not unuseful for us, in all our trials for the profession of our faith, to consider that the eyes as it were of all that have gone before us in the same, or the like, or greater trials, are upon us, to bear witness how we acquit ourselves. It cannot but be AN UNSPEAKABLE ADVANTAGE and encouragement to have all these holy and blessed persons stand about us, testifying unto the FOLLY OF OUR FEARS, the FALSENESS of all the SUGGESTIONS OF UNBELIEF, and the FRAUD OF SATAN'S TEMPTATIONS; as also unto the EXCELLENCY OF THE DUTIES whereunto we are called, and the CERTAINTY OF OUR SUCCESS in them ­ through FAITH." Amen.  
