Sunday, May 27, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.  Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though  the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the  waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake  with swelling thereof. Selah. There is a river, the streams whereof  shall make glad the city of God, the holy place of the tabernacles of  the most high. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved; God  shall help her, and that right early. THE HEATHEN RAGED, (Note:  `WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGE?', [Psa. 2:1.]) THE KINGDOMS WERE  MOVED: He uttered His voice, the earth melted. The Lord of hosts is  with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. Come, behold the  works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in the earth (i.e., at  9/11, in Iraq, in Afghanistan, WW2, Korea, Vietnam, WW1, American  Civil War, etc., etc., around the world, in ancient wars and battles ­  historic and prehistoric ­ Greece, Rome, Europe, Goths, Tartars,  Huns, Russians, etc., etc. ­ billions of souls. `WHAT DESOLATIONS  HE HATH MADE IN THE EARTH.' [Psa. 46:8.]) He maketh wars to  cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth  the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire (i.e., state of the  art military killing machinery). Be still, and know that I am God; I will  be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth. The  Lord of hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah."  (Psa. 46:1-11.)  "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. HE THAT SITTETH IN THE HEAVENS SHALL LAUGH; THE LORD SHALL HAVE THEM IN DERISION (i.e., mockery, ridicule, scorn, contempt.)." (Psalm 2:1-4.)  Are you here, Mr. Mocker and Scoffer? Your almighty Creator is sitting in the Heavens and is laughing at you in your stupidity. Yes. And it doesn't matter one iota if you are a king, a ruler, or a common man taking counsel in a conspiracy against the Lord. You are a lot of vanity or hot air, whom your Maker is holding you in scorn and contempt ­ in mockery and ridicule. Yes. It may surprise you to learn that God is sitting in Heaven laughing at your comic opera ignorance. Get used to it, for such is the case. I sent the gentle folks at Westboro Baptist Church to warn you. You ignored them and persecuted them. I also will laugh at your calamity; to wit: "Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets (Note: I put it to you, Beloved. That sounds like a word-picture of the street-preaching of Westboro Baptist Church all over the streets, sidewalks and parks of the United States of America. Praise the Lord!) She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates; in the city she uttereth her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof; behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none  Sunday, May 27, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  of my reproof; I ALSO WILL LAUGH AT YOUR CALAMITY; I WILL MOCK WHEN YOUR  FEAR COMETH; when your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh  as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call  upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; for  that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord; they would none  of my counsel; they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of  their own way, and be filled with their own devices. For the turning away of the simple  shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But whoso hearkeneth  unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil." (Prov. 1:20-33)  Nor is this laughter of God a trivial, unconnected thing; but it is profound, and joins itself to the holy vindication of the righteous; to wit: "For evildoers shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace. THE WICKED PLOTTETH AGAINST THE JUST, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. THE LORD SHALL LAUGH AT HIM; FOR HE SEETH THAT HIS DAY IS COMING." (Psa. 37:9-13) When Doeg the mad dog Edomite occasioned the death ­ the slaughter ­ of the entire city of Nob at the hands of wildly suspicious King Saul ­ including murdering 85 innocent priests ­ David wrote a Psalm prognosticating the doom of both Doeg and Saul, ending with the LAUGHTER of the righteous; to wit: "Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs like a sharp razor, working deceitfully. Thou lovest evil more than good; and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah. Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah. The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall LAUGH at him." (Psa. 52:1-6)  This is a Psalm of David, published first when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech. This is another striking illustration of a man who is so deep down scurrilous and evil, that the Holy Ghost gives us many historic facts on the ground warranting plucking the son of Belial out of the land of the living by the immediate hand of an outraged God, casting him forthwith into Hell ­ and then arranging things so that not only God laughs at the lost soul of the damned ­ but that thereafter the people of God laugh also; to wit: "THE RIGHTEOUS ALSO SHALL SEE, AND FEAR, AND SHALL LAUGH AT HIM." (Psa. 52:6) Nob was a little city c. eight miles west of Jerusalem; where Ahimelech and 85 more priests lived among the general population of "men and women, children and sucklings" ­ all of whom will be slaughtered in one day by Doeg the Edomite on orders of King Saul, the paranoid ruler of Israel (!)(!) David was running for his life from Saul when our story by the Holy Ghost for our learning and comfort, takes up; to wit: "Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest; and Ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone? And no man with thee? (And here David begins to spin a spider's web of lies which one must grapple with, considering the deadly circumstances David found himself in at the time. After all, the King of Israel with his complete army and all resources was sworn to kill David. [Think, Osama Bin Laden.]) And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me a business,  Sunday, May 27, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and  what I have commanded thee; and I have appointed my servants to such and such a place. Now  therefore what is under thy hand? Give me five loaves of bread in mine hand, or what there is  found...so the priest gave him hallowed bread; for there was no bread there but the shewbread,  that was taken from before the Lord to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away. Now a  certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the Lord; and his name  was Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul. And David said unto  Ahimelech, and is there not here under thine hand spear or sword? For I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste (More Davidian  fine-spun lies for us to consider. Not nearly on a par with the Bathsheba adulteress caper and the  cover-up murder of her noble husband Uriah the Hittite outrage. But the same principle is involved)." (1 Sam. 21:1-8.)  Before we blast David too often or too fiercely, let us reflect, that, "But If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (1 Jn. 1:7.) What blessed, simple absolutes. David gave diligence to make his calling and election sure. He left a large body of probative and relevant evidence that he walked in the light of God's presence and truth when he wrote the Psalms.  If he walked in the light, he could not get out of the light. If he walked in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ cleansed him from all sin. ALL SIN. Including the sin with Bathsheba and Uriah the Hittite. How comforting when considering my own sins. David, in the case involving Ahimelech and the priests of Nob, occasioned the bloody murders of hundreds of innocent people. THE BLOOD OF JESUS CHRIST CLEANSED DAVID FROM ALL SIN.  Beloved. Brother David is with us today, one of a great cloud of heavenly witnesses. (Heb. 12:1.) The blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed him ­ not some of his sins ­ not most of his sins ­ the blood of Jesus Christ cleansed David FROM ALL SIN ­ Brother David ­ are you here? ­ what is your testimony to us? "Deliver me from blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my salvation; and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. (What else, David?) For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it; thou delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise." (Psa. 51:14-17) Upon David's lying request for a weapon, that further imperiled the priests and citizens of Nob, the priest said, to wit: "The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here, wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod; if thou wilt take that, take it; for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me. And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath." (1 Sam. 21:9-10) David is the standing symbol for all God's elect, and his life of continuous wars and battles symbolize the church militant and her struggles with Satan here below. Beloved, is it not our daily experience? And, certainly, David had more battles and wars than any other character in the Bible.  Sunday, May 27, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  A study of David ­ his words, phrases, and fights ­ would be very fruitful. David ­ for example ­ made a study of names that we should call the non-Elect. David starts right off, calling them FOOLS in Psalm 14:1, and again in Psalm 53:1.  Think of it. Of course they are fools, running their big mouths, insulting God, with their nonsense declaring there is no God. Then declares as a matter of fact ­ an axiom if you please ­ that all the non-Elect are physically and morally corrupt and abominable. This matter is not open for further discussion. All non-Elect people are ­ (by definition) ­ FOOLS. ABOMINABLE, CORRUPT, FOOLS. "The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one." (Psa. 14:2,3)  The expression, Children of Men, means the non-Elect, in contradistinction to its clear counterpart, to wit: Children of God. Verse 2 means that God looked down from heaven upon the damned, to see if there were any that were erroneously mixed in with His children, to pluck them out ­ if so ­ and cast them into Hell. The exercise is intended to show how thoroughly and stringently God keeps the separation line between the saved and the lost, for time and eternity. When God looks down from Heaven upon the non-Elect, He will find none with the least bit of spiritual understanding, and NONE THE LEAST BIT INTERESTED IN SEEKING GOD. "They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one." (Psa. 14:3) This is further universal description and definition of unregenerate mankind; and a sad picture it is, indeed. Without the imputation of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the regenerating work of the Holy Ghost, mankind's brutish nature would prevail. "Have all the Workers Of Iniquity no knowledge? Who eat up My People as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord." (Psa. 14:4) Here in verse 4 may more easily be seen the nomenclature of the saved and the damned. MY PEOPLE are plainly identified by so many words; and are being cannibalized by the other group; to wit: "Have all the WORKERS OF INIQUITY no knowledge? Who Eat up MY PEOPLE AS THEY EAT BREAD, and call not upon the Lord." (Psa. 14:4)  How could it be plainer? Mankind is divided into two groups, Workers of Iniquity; and, My People. "There were they in great fear; for God is in the generation of the righteous. Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge. Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad." (Psa. 14:5-7)  When you want to discuss national depravity and corruption, the prophets point you to Gibeah. Hosea 9:9. To wit: "They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah (i.e., irreversible): therefore He will remember their iniquity, He will visit their sins." (Hosea 9:9)  America must learn the lesson of the sodomite takeover of Gibeah, and the loss of the tribe of Benjamin. But I fear it is too late.  I love you.  Amen.  
