

Dear Brother: 

The Trustees and I deeply appreciate the response made last year by many Baba lovers who gave contributions to the Avatar Meher Baba Trust despite the heavy expense incurred by them in coming to India for the "Darshan Days." 

The main concern of the Trustees is to see that the Trust is put on a firm basis financially so that all of Beloved Avatar Meher Baba's wishes as incorporated in the Trust Deed may be fulfilled one hun≠dred percent. Unless and until this basis for the stability of the Trust is established, the Trustees will find it difficult to fulfill Beloved Baba's wishes. 

To carry these out, it is suggested that each Baba lover in the West should set aside per day, the amount of 30 cents; ifthis is too much for some to do, then 20 cents a day, or even 10 cents a day. At the end of the year the amount from each donor would come to about one hundred dollars, seventy-five dollars, either more or less. For those who can give more,they should set aside a sum in accor≠dance with what they feel they can. Amounts may be sent once or twice a year, or at any time convenient to the donor. A similar suggestion is also being sent to Baba lovers in the East. 

This suggestion is brought to your at∑ tention as it wiII help the Trustees to further the development and mainte∑ nance of the Property at Meherabad and also take care of the beneficiaries. Contributions should be sent as a Bank Draft or Postal Money Order made out to:AVATAR MEHER BABA TRUST (King's Road, Ahmednagar, M.S., India), NOT asa personal cheque. It takes severalmonths for a cheque to go through theBank before the amount is realized in rupees. 

If you make out your donation simply to "Avatar Meher Baba Trust," the dona≠tion will be utilized as follows: 

11 percent for the maintenance and development of the Trust Estate and 89 percent to the forty one beneficiaries as mentioned in the Trust Deed. 

However, if you wish your donation to be utilized exclusively for the mainte∑ nance and development of the Trust Estate or exclusively for distribution to the 41 beneficiaries, or on the other hand for both purposes, that is, for mainte∑ nance-development and the 41 benefi∑ ciaries in any percentage desired by you,then please state your wish clearly in acovering note to the Chairman, AvatarMeher Baba Trust, when sending yourdonation. 

If each Baba lover would do this 

every year, we, the Trustees, would then 

find that we could carry out with greater 

confidence the wishes of Avatar Meher 

Baba as laid down in the Deed of Avatar 

Meher Baba Trust. 

No Baba lover should feel compelled to contribute to the Trust; Baba would never want it so. Only those who feel prompted from the heart should contribute according to the suggestions in this letter, or as theyfeel best suited to themselves. 

For your information, Avatar Meher 

Baba Trust has now been registered as a 

Public Trust with registration No. E/150, 

Ahmednagar, by the Assistant Charity 

Commissioner, Poona Region, Poona,

India, on the 7th August 1969. Therefore, 

it is now all the more essential that all 

contributions and official correspondence 

pertaining to Avatar Meher Baba Trust be 

addressed directly to: The Chairman, 

Avatar Meher Baba Trust, King's Road,

Ahmednagar, M.S., India, and no official 

Trust matters should be included in your 

personal correspondence. 

This letter is being sent to each group head in the West whom we ask to please distribute to each Baba lover in their area, and also to any Baba lover whom they know does not belong to any group. 

To all Baba lovers go warm greetings and a hearty Jai Baba' In the service of Avatar Meher Baba, 


