 Last week we looked at the curse of careless worship. And Malachi drove his word against the priests in the temple.Verse 6: If I am a master, where is my fear? says the LORDof hosts to you, O priests, who despise my name.    But the sense you get as you read last week's textis that not just the priests but the people too were being carelessin worship.  For example, in 1:14 the Lord says, Cursedbe the cheat who has a male in his flock, and vows it, and yetsacrifices to the Lord what is blemished.  This is not justa priestly problem.  All over Israel people loved profit, andso brought the worthless leftovers of their business to God.  In today's text Malachi focuses directly on the priests. Verse 1: And now, O priests, this command is for you.  Before we get into the text let's ask what relevancethis has for us.  Who are the priests today?  Or are there any? The New Testament never uses the term priest to describe a pastoror elder in the church.  There is no official priesthood in theNew Testament church.  The reason for this is very clear: JesusChrist himself has become a permanent priest for us and the OldTestament priesthood is now obsolete.  Hebrews 7:23-25,  The priests were many in number, because they wereprevented by death from continuing in office; but he holds hispriesthood permanently, because he continues for ever.  Consequentlyhe is able for all time to save those who draw near to God throughhim, since he always lives to make intercession for them.  Christ is now the one and only priest between usand God.  The reason for this is that his sacrifice was finaland his life is indestructible (7:16).    When Christ appeared as a high priest . . . he enteredonce for all  into the Holy Place, taking not the blood of goatsand calves but his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption.(Hebrews 9:11-12)  So the Old Testament priesthood is replaced onceand for all by the priestly ministry of Jesus -- the offeringof himself as the final sacrifice for sin, and the intercedingfor us today in heaven.  There is no official priesthood in theNew Testament church.  Therefore wherever you find today an emphasis onthe priesthood of the clergy, there you also find minimizing ofthe once-for-allness of the sacrifice of Christ.  For example,in the Roman Catholic church the official priesthood is extremelyimportant because the mass is a real sacrifice.   The bread andcup are really transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christand are offered up to God for the forgiveness of sins.  This repeatedsacrifice in the church necessitated an official priesthood toadminister the sacrifices just like the Old Testament had an officialpriesthood to offer the animal sacrifices.  But both the mass and the clerical priesthood minimizeand distort the once-for-all sacrifice of Christ on Calvary. The truth is lost or minimized that there are no more sacrificesfor sin; the death of Christ once for all is sufficient to forgiveall who believe; and that's why there is no more official priesthoodin the New Testament; the priestly offering of sacrifices is done. Christ ended it.    Instead, Peter calls the whole church a holypriesthood (1 Peter 2:5) and a royal priesthood(1 Peter 2:9); and John says that Christ made the whole churcha kingdom, priests to his God and Father (Revelation 1:6). This means that Christ has opened the way for all of us to comedirectly to God through him.  We do not need any human mediator. We can walk with Christ -- our high priest -- right into theHoliest Place where God dwells and find grace to help in timeof need (Hebrews 4:16).    So there is no official priesthood in the New Testamentchurch.  No church leaders are called priests because of theiroffice in the church.  But this raises the question: Were thereother duties that priests had in the Old Testament besides offeringsacrifices for the sake of the people -- duties that may indeedbe continued in the New Testament?  The answer is a clear yes.  Notice Malachi 2:7, Forthe lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and men should seekinstruction from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the LORDof hosts.    In other words the priests were teachers.  This partof their ministry is continued in the church of the New Testament. Ephesians 4:11 says that Christ gave to the church some pastorsand teachers to equip the saints for the work of the ministry. 1 Timothy says that there are to be overseers who are able inteaching (3:2), and that some elders in the church are to laborin preaching and teaching (5:17; cf. Titus 1:9).    So this part of the priests' duties in Israel iscontinued in the elders of the New Testament church -- they areresponsible to teach and guide the church.  But they are nevercalled priests, because that would imply too muchlikeness to the Old Testament office.  Pastors do not offer sacrificesfor the forgiveness of sins -- not in the mass or any other way. We do not offer people Jesus Christ in the mass, we point peopleto the finished, all-sufficient work of the cross and directlyto the living, interceding Jesus Christ, by the Word of God. We are teachers and preachers above all else.    So my conclusion is that Malachi 2:1-9 is very relevantfor us today because the priestly failure that Malachi talks abouthas to do especially with their duties as teachers and moral examplesfor the people.  The failure he warns against would be just asmuch failure today!    But now the question rises: Why should you (who arenot pastors) be interested in two messages on the failures andsuccesses of the pastoral ministry.  There are at least four reasons.    I will die someday, and this congregation willhave to call another preaching pastor.  Most churches are veryunprepared to do this because they have not been taught the Biblicalvision of the pastoral ministry.  You should be praying daily for the pastoral leadershipof the church.  But you can't pray with confidence and power ifyou don't know what the Bible teaches about the pitfalls and purposesof the pastoral ministry.  You should hold your pastors accountable to fulfillthe Biblical vision of pastoral ministry.  This is not inconsistentwith a submissive spirit toward the leadership of the church whichHebrews 13:17 commands.  It means that the church and not theclergy is the final court of appeal in matters of order and discipline(Matthew 18:17; 1 Corinthians 5:4).  But you can't hold leadershipaccountable to do their duty if you do not know the Biblical teachingof what that duty is.  It is a great encouragement to a pastor when thepeople respond to his ministry with understanding -- when thereis a deeply shared common vision of why he does what he does. But that kind of deep, joyful responsiveness is simply not possibleexcept where the people learn what the Biblical vision of thepastoral calling is.   So I hope we have laid a foundation now for thisweek's and next week's messages -- that is, a foundation for whythis text about Old Testament priests is relevant for pastorstoday and why even non-pastors should care about what it teaches.  Of course I have left out what might be the mostobvious reason why a text dealing with pastoral failure is relevanttoday, namely, that there is so much of it, especially sexualfailure.  I was reading this week an essay by Erroll Hulse,a Baptist pastor in Liverpool, England in which he said,   It is a morbid and depressing fact that when it comesto adultery, there are too many casualties among pastors.  Ministersare just as vulnerable as others.  No area, no country, no denominationis immune.  The damage done in each case is irreparable: the breakdown,as far as ministry is concerned, final.  This is a distastefulsubject, but we cannot shirk it.  The matter demands faithfultreatment.  Let him who thinks that he stands take heed lest hefall. (The Preacher and Preaching, ed. Samuel Logan, pp. 75-6)  And just this week I was on the phone with anotherpastor in the BGC who had preached recently for a colleague. During the series of meetings they took a walk together and discussedthis issue with great earnestness.  Only a few weeks after myfriend returned to his own church he received that word that hispastor friend was forced to resign over an affair with a womanin the church -- even though he had looked him right in the eyeand never confessed it.  And what we see today in the moral collapse of theministry is not the worst priestly failure.  Far more devastatingfor the church long term is the doctrinal defection of thousandsof pastors away from the authority and sufficiency of Scriptureand away from Biblical truth.    When the Great Awakening in New England was overback in the 1740's there were pastors who reacted against theCalvinistic basis of this great revival and turned to Arminianism. And then, led by Charles Chauncy, a Boston Congregationalist,they moved to Unitarianism and Universalism.    And you can feel to this day, 200 years later, theicy effects of that doctrinal departure on the state of the churchin New England.  Would that Charles Chauncy had only committedadultery!  And would that this were our only problem today!  Don'tbe misled!  The pastoral scandals of our day are not the greatestdanger to the church.  The great danger is the minimizing of deepspiritual commitment to doctrinal, Biblical truth.  When God predicted the ruin of his people Israelin the book of Amos he said that the famine that would destroywas a famine of the word of God:  Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord God, whenI will send a famine on the land; not a famine of bread, nor athirst for water, but of hearing the words of the LORD.  Theyshall wander from sea to sea, and from north to east; they shallrun to and fro, to seek the word of the LORD, but they shall notfind it.  That's the most devastating priestly failure, andthat's the one Malachi is most concerned with.  So let's turnto the text and see how Malachi treats this issue of priestlyfailure.  What Malachi does in 2:1-9 is contrast the failureof the priests in his day with the successes of the early priestsin Israel's history.  In verses 2, 8 and 9 Malachi mentions fivefailures.  And in verses 5, 6 and 7 he describes what a successfulpriesthood looks like.    I think that all we will have time for this morningis to look at two of the deepest priestly failures -- the twomentioned in verse 2.  And then next Sunday we move straight intothe other verses and round out the picture of the true ministerof the word.  Verses 1-2:  And now, O priests, this command is for you.  Ifyou will not listen, if you will not lay it to heart to give gloryto my name, says the LORD of hosts, then I will send the curseupon you and I will curse your blessings.  Two priestly failures are mentioned here.  First,the failure to listen to God, and second the failure to have aheart burden for the glory of God.  1.  If you will not listen. . .  I willsend the curse upon you.  One great danger to the pastoral ministryis that the voice of God in Scripture may be drowned out by othervoices.  One of the most frightening things in the ministry isthe possibility that one day we may wake up and read the sacredpage and hear nothing from God.  Why is this so terrible?  Because the last line ofverse 7 says the minister of the word is the messenger ofthe Lord of hosts.  There is a difference between a lectureon the meaning of ancient texts and a message from the Lord ofhosts.  God has appointed preachers in the church not simply tolead discussions, not simply to explain problems, not simply analyzetexts, but to herald a message to his people.  And you can't heraldwhat you don't hear.  I heard W. A. Criswell of First Baptist Dalllas quotethe laymen of his church one time.  They said, Pastor, weknow what the editorialists say, and we know what the commentatorssay, and we know what the economists and politicians say.  Whatwe want to know from you is, DOES GOD HAVE ANYTHING TO SAY?!   If your will not listen . . . says the Lordof hosts, then I will send a curse upon you.  2.  The second priestly failure in verse 2 is thefailure to have a heart burden for the glory of God.  Ifyou will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name, says theLord of hosts, then I will send the curse upon you.  Note very carefully the wording here.  The issueis not merely whether the glory of God is the explicit unifyingtheme of the minister's doctrine and preaching, but whether therelies on his heart a burden to see God glorified.  If youwill not lay it to heart (put it on your heart) to give gloryto my name . . .    The congregation must ask, Is it not only a partof his theology but also the passion of his soul?  Does the gloryof God come before the approval and praise of his people?  Doesit come before professional advancement?  Does it come beforefinancial reward and material comfort?  Does he come back to itagain and again, like the needle of a compass toward the magnetof truth, or like a weather vain in a heavenward wind?  Does itcome out in private as well as in public, in praying as well aspreaching, in playing as well as studying?  What could be more crucial in calling a pastor, orpraying for a pastor, or holding a pastor accountable than thathe lay it to heart -- that it weigh on his heart -- to giveglory to the name of God?  And so I close with this admonition: desire thatkind of pastor, love the word of God and the glory of his nameand pray for that kind of pastor until you have that kind of pastor,to the glory of our great God and Savior. Amen. 
