Development of a catatonia
From Mondays until Fridays I was accommodated again in the hospital room, the "prisoner cell". I began to do without my usual lunch in the coffee break. Only one sip juice I allowed myself. You must show that I can hold out also without much meal , I thought, like the former prisoners here. At the breakfast I ate only one roll, one half with butter and jam, the other half only with butter (which I otherwise never did). More I wasn't allowed to allow myself. Every of my eating acts, so I thought, would be watched by the patients sitting at my desk.
In the occupational therapy I already knoted at my second wall-hanging. Unfortunately, they played there no eastern radio-station. I wasn't standing anymore in the hospital room. It was always somewhat embarrassing, if the nurse came in and I were there standing around in the dark. Now I was lying simply in bed in the dark in the afternoon and in the evening and tried nothing to think except to hold out. I waited for the meals. At meals I was careful not too early to stand in line or to sit down. I was still in the test! Although I was hungry, I was not allowed to show greed. At the lunch I always left something potatoes and meat on the plate. When coffee drinking I ate only one piece of cakes instead of usually two. At evening meal the nurse had almost always to get me, because I still wanted to be courageous and with the first call did not come. So I wasted away.
It was Christmas and I was at home with my parents. On the first holiday in the east came a fairy tale film - a fantasyful enriched Rapunzel story with the actors Renate Blume and Rolf Hoppe. I thought, the film is shown specially because of me. The beautiful girl was held by the bad stepmother in the tower. She cuts her off the long pig-tail and hangs it from the window. The young prince (that should be certainly a reference to me) climbs high at the pig-tail, but the bad old woman lets him fall in the thorn bushes. He blind and is brought in this status back to the castle. I became slowly uncomfortable. Should I go blind? Should I not still rather go out of the room and not watch television? Actress Renate Blume and the other actors seemed to affirm these my thoughts by their facial expressions and gesturing. Yes, I should not watch television! The television apparently harmed me and was a danger for the test.
Also in the evening, during the "Current Camera" (evening news), I think consciously for the speaker Klaus Feldman: "Should I go out?". "Yes, go out!", he made me understand with a winking . If I formulated this question internally at a western station, the moderators became quite hectically and came thick and fast in the presentation of references to me. They wanted to make me crazy! They would just love that! But I went out of the room.
In my mind the realization was formed that the test parties with the brain scanning machine could read my internal consiously literally formulated thoughts. And that at home and in the hospital. If they could read my thoughts, then they could see possibly also that, what I saw? I guess: The test agreement about me could be that the west still does not know, who I am and where I am, but only gets the data copied, which drop from my brain monitoring. So it was because of me whether I betrayed me and my environment. This was the key consideration for the catatonia.
I did not want to betray myself and also not my family members . I did not look no more into the mirror and mostly remained in my room, without light and looked into an insignificant corner. At the inevitable meal I looked at nobody more, went lowered view, looked only at wooden board with the sandwiches and could not be induced looking to the television also by the maddest gags from western stations. Also on Mondays at the doctor's round I hardly looked up to the physicians. The west would have otherwise seen them - through my eyes. They had certainly their scouts in the whole country. And they know certainly the chief doctor. I wanted not to endanger him and did not look at him. He didn't mind this situation at all. A death-courageous Russian! (afterwards looking, one could say, if it had not been the west, which could see through me as bad power, perhaps then it would have been something different, in earlier centuries maybe the devil.)
On weekend again at home I was mostly in my room. It was only dim light and I was there and looked only at the floor. I also believed to hear pounding noises, which should say to me: Hold out! The west no weakness show! Were only the quite normal noises in a house with many apartments. But I referred it all to me. My family members it became too much with me. They brought me back into the hospital.