Sunday, April 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  A sleazier, more contemptible King of Israel never existed, than Zimri, who reigned only 7 DAYS, and then, like a cornered rat, committed suicide by burning down the palace upon his head; to wit:  "And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died." (1 Kgs. 16:18)  The clever, opportunistic pig who led the army that besieged Zimri and forced his suicide was a fellow traitor named Omri ­ FATHER OF AHAB, OF AHAB AND JEZEBEL FAME; to wit: "So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria; and Ahab his son reigned in his stead. And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel; and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years." ­ (Should we not recognize going in that those were 22 years of pure agony and Hell on earth for the Lord's people?) ­ "And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshiped him. And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria. And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him." 1 Kgs. 16:28-33.  We might well ask: How did such a murderous monster ­ or monsters ­ as Jezebel and Ahab come to occupy the thrones of absolute tyranny over the minds, and bodies, and property, and reputations, and resources of the Lord's putative people on earth? An examination of the Holy Ghost- inspired history of the times may yield authoritative answers, helpful to us in our time and for our circumstances; to wit: "Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope... That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." (Rom. 15:4,6)  A series of fatal missteps gave the kingdom to Omri, Ahab's father; "But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, and did worse than all that were before him. For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin" ­ (think, golden calves system of idolatry to compete with the true worship of God in His temple in Jerusalem) ­ "wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities." 1 Kgs. 16:25,26. The disgusting bloody treason of Zimri cost him his kingdom and his life, which gave the kingdom by default to Omri. Zimri was king Elah's military captain of half his chariots when he "conspired against him, as he was drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house. And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him...and reigned in his stead. And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he slew all the house of (his predecessor king) Baasha; he left him not one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends." 1 Kgs. 16:9-11.  Take notice, Beloved: This was a bloody massacre that effectuated a military coup d'e-tat (i.e., a sudden overthrow of a government by a person or persons in positions of authority, in deliberate violation of lawful norms). Zimri was a high-ranking military officer in king Elah's army. He found Elah "drinking himself drunk," and, pursuant to a conspiracy with others, Zimri entered the private house where the drinking party was going on (one Arza's house, king Elah's steward, and probably a co-conspirator against the king), smote the king, killed him, and reigned in his stead ­ BUT FOR SEVEN DAYS (!) So, King Zimri (!) Murderous Traitor (!)(!) King of Israel ­ for seven days (!) And what was he doing for that seven days?  Sunday, April 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Well, no doubt he was doing what he thought would solidlfy the Kingdom of Israel under his own  suzerainty. The record shows he was urgently murdering, butchering, and slaughtering deposed  king Elah's entire household, and bureaucracy, kinsfolks ­ even down to his friends! ­ no doubt,  thousands of people! no doubt, old Tirzah (capital city of Israel in those days) ran red with blood during those seven days of the reign of Zimri. He was a monster ­ in the secret, unconscious employ of the King of kings; to wit:  "Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, ACCORDING TO THE WORD OF THE LORD, which he spake against Baasha by Jehu the prophet, For all the sins of Baasha, AND THE SINS OF ELAH HIS SON, by which they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities." (1 Kgs. 16:12,13)  Further, the outrageous conduct of Zimri began the split second he sat down upon Israel's throne of slaughter; to wit: "And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him (i.e., king Elah)...and reigned in his stead. And it came to pass, WHEN HE BEGAN TO REIGN, AS SOON AS HE SAT ON HIS THRONE, that he slew all the house of Baasha, he left him NOT ONE that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends." 1 Kgs. 16:10,11.  Now about this time in the history of the world, all things must come to pass from eternity, that Israel (the 10 northern tribes) must be severely punished for their grievous idolatry in institutionalizing the competitive worship of the true and living God in His temple in Jerusalem, by pretending He now dwells in Jeroboam's Sin; i.e., two golden calves in Bethel and Dan; to wit: "And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David. If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their Lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah. WHEREUPON, THE KING TOOK COUNSEL, AND MADE TWO CALVES OF GOLD, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan. And this thing became a sin; for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan. And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi." (1 Kgs. 12:26-31)  (This passage from 1st Kgs. 12:26-31 should often be read and studied, showing that EXPEDIENCY is the only rule by which the Golden Calf crowd serves their religion.) Thereafter, things went from bad to worse in Israel. They rapidly descended into irrecoverable apostasy; and, with no holy pattern to keep their spirits and doctrines in paths of righteousness, cunningly devised fables and darkest heresy completely took over. They must be nationally punished, for an example unto them that after should live ungodly; to wit: "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly." (2 Pet. 2:6)  The monster Ahab and his demon-possessed wife Jezebel MUST come upon the scene ­ which is the worst punishment an apostate nation like Israel could experience. It must needs be that a strong, bloody, outrageous leader like Zimri should arise and infuriate the rabble, in split-second timing. This is an amazing thing, when looked at aright, with a view toward discerning the signs of the times accurately. Within seven days, Zimri went from assassinating king Elah, to assuming the throne of Israel, to annihilating King Elah's family and constituents and even friends, to committing suicide by burning the king's palace down around his head ­ all of which appears to have suddenly infuriated the evil and idolatrous populace and the army of Israel, such that they spontaneously and unanimously  Sunday, April 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  made Omri ­ (AHAB'S FATHER [!][!]) ­ king over Israel (!) ­ THAT DAY (!); to wit: "And the  people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath also slain the king;  WHEREFORE all Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.  And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah." ­ (i.e., the  capital city of Israel in those days, and where Zimri was holed up in terror at that time) ­ "And it  came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king's  house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died. For his sins which he sinned in  doing evil in the sight of the Lord, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did,  to make Israel to sin (i.e., substituting two golden calves as Israel's gods, and by worshiping and  serving them in rank idolatry). Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought,  are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?" 1 Kg. 16:16-20.  And so it came to pass that Zimri's strange demise after only seven days on the throne as king of Israel cleared the way for Omri ­ Ahab's evil father (!)(!) ­ to be king; which placed the monster Ahab only one heart-beat from being the scourge of God for punishing Israel for twenty-two years, for Israel's sins. (I liken it to Obama's role as the scourge of God for punishing America in these days, for her sins. Whoever dreamed that such a baby-killing, immoral, sodomite-enabling heretic could sit as president of the United States? Further proof that this nation is doomed and awaiting the fiery destruction of the Almighty. America deserves infidel Obama!) But then a hitch materialized which threatened obliquely to derail the Omri/Ahab ambition for the throne. An unknown opponent challenged Omri; to wit: "Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts; half of the people followed Tibni," ­ (Gill says it's not easy to say who this Tibni character is) ­ "the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half followed Omri. But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath; SO TIBNI DIED, AND OMRI REIGNED." 1 Kgs. 16:21,22.  Sounds a lot like a corrupt democracy, where it is extremely dangerous to lose an election: `So Tibni died, and Omri reigned." At any rate, the last hurdle is cleared for the filthy military tyrant Omri, father of the murderous monster Ahab to be coronated king of Israel. And, sure enough, Omri's reign was characterized by provoking the Lord God of Israel to anger by His sins and blasphemies. "So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria; AND AHAB HIS SON REIGNED IN HIS STEAD... And Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years. And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were before him. And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshiped him. And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria. And Ahab made a grove, and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him." 1 Kgs. 16:28-33.  The frightful conditions of affairs in Israel under king Ahab and his wicked wife queen Jezebel were succinctly described by the prophet Elijah while hiding in a cave from Jezebel's most recent threat to murder the prophet; to wit: "And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts; because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.' 1 Kgs. 19:13,14.  You see here that although Elijah was fleeing and hiding directly because of an express and specific threat by Jezebel to kill the prophet within 24 hours; I say, even though the threat was limited to Jezebel, Elijah's experience told him that one mind, one murderous and prevaricating mind ­ even  Sunday, April 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Satan's mind ­ is at work when mischief is afoot threatening to do deadly injury to God's Elect  servants working God's will and speaking God's words. Jn. 8:44. Here's how Jezebel's threat went  down; to wit:  "And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword. Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time. And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness." (1 Kgs. 19:1-4)  The overwrought prophet said, "The children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant...etc...and THEY seek my life to take it away." 1 Kgs. 19:10,14. Whereas, it was JEZEBEL only who had sworn to kill Elijah within 24 hours. Lessons to be learned: The wicked rabble making up the total population of the 10 northern tribes are one with their profoundly wicked leaders, Ahab and Jezebel (!) And we have learned from extensive on-the-ground experience, that, when it comes to treatment of His prophets contending for His truth, especially, then the rebellious body politic is amazingly and inseparably ONE with their spineless leaders in seeking to destroy His messengers and silence His Truth. Coast to coast, border to border, all without exception, they are one and indivisible. Ergo, they are all doomed and damned, for, "Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished." Prov. 11:21,16:5. "Knowing that I am set for the defense of the gospel" (Phil. 1:17); maintain and defend pure gospel truth; contend for the faith once and for all time delivered to the saints. Jude 3.  The treatment of Naboth and his sons by Ahab and Jezebel epitomizes how all mankind routinely treat God's elect. As a matter of deeply held religious doctrine and faith, Naboth wanted to keep his family inheritance which his ancestors received when Joshua first divided and portioned out the land of Canaan, the land of promise, symbolizing Heaven; and which he intended to pass on to his own sons. To Naboth it was a matter of sincerely-held religious belief and practice. But Ahab merely wanted Naboth's plot of land for a herb garden. So, when Naboth refused to sell or trade ­ for conscience sake ­ Ahab and Jezebel cooked up a criminal scheme under color of law to kill Naboth and his sons and steal their land; to wit: "And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it. And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria; behold, HE IS IN THE VINEYARD OF NABOTH, WITHER HE HAS GONE TO POSSESS IT. And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine." (1 Kgs. 21:16-19)  And so it came to pass that Ahab's dead carcass became dung to fertilize Naboth's vineyard; to wit: "Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite; for remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the Lord laid this burden upon him; Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, AND THE BLOOD OF HIS SONS, saith the Lord; and I will requite thee IN THIS PLAT, saith the Lord... And the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say. This is Jezebel." (2 Kgs. 9:25,26,37) "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day & night unto him?" (Luke 18:7)  I love you. Amen.  
