  April 7, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church Easter John Piper, Pastor       HE SAT DOWN AT THE RIGHT HAND OFMAJESTY   (Hebrews 1:1-4)    God, after He spoke long ago to the fathers in the prophets in manyportions and in many ways, 2 in these last days has spoken to us inHis   Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whomalso He made the world. 3 And He is the radiance of His glory and theexact representation of His nature, and upholds all things by theword of His power. When He had made purification of sins, He sat downat the right hand of the Majesty on high; 4 having become as muchbetter than the angels, as He has inherited a more excellent namethan they.     Last Sunday -- Verses 1-2    Last Sunday we looked at the first two verses of this book. We sawthat in history there are two phases of God's redemptivecommunication with mankind. One phase was the many times and ways hespoke through the prophets to the Jewish people of old -- recorded inthe Old Testament. Verse 1: "God, after He spoke long ago to thefathers in the prophets in many portions and in many ways . . ." Thesecond and last phase was his speaking through his Son Jesus Christ.Verse 2: "In these last days has spoken to us in His   Son."  He calls these "the last days" because the coming of Jesus Christthe Son of God into the world was the decisive Word of God. There isno third phase of God's Word in history. Everything in history iseither explanation or application of the meaning of Jesus Christ, theWord of God.  And we saw in verse 2b that God has appointed his Son, JesusChrist to be the heir of all things. This means that Christ can makegood on all his promises. In the end everything will belong toChrist. He will own it and rule it. And so he can make everythingserve the joy of his people.  And we saw that he is heir of all things, not only because he didall the Father gave him to do in history, but also because "throughhim God made the world." He is the Creator. He is heir of all things,because he made all things. These are staggering truths about theperson, Jesus Christ. And the aim of the writer is to win ourattention and admiration and trust and allegiance and worship forJesus Christ, the Son of God.    Maundy Thursday -- Verse 3    Then on Thursday night at the communion table we focused on thephrase in verse 3: "When he had made purification for sins . . ." Wesaw three things:  1) The word "he" -- we are dealing here with a person, not just anidea or a tradition or a religion or a practice. Jesus Christ was andis a living person. And he wills to be known, loved, trusted,followed, worshipped, enjoyed. He is alive and is in this room amongus by his Spirit this morning receiving all that we do, andresponding to us.  2) The words "of sins" -- he made purification "of sins." And westressed that sin is a terrible and great reality in the world. Wesaw from 3:17 that God is angry at sin. And this holy anger is whatmakes the purification of sins necessary.  3) The phrase "made purification" (verse 3b). God gave his Son todie for our sins so that his anger could be removed from us and oursins could be forgiven and our hearts could be purified. This he didonce for all -- never to be repeated, because his work of sin-bearingwas perfect.  Now this morning is Easter -- Resurrection Sunday -- a day forpondering and celebrating the fact that after Jesus Christ had madepurification for sins by dying in our place, he rose from the deadand sat down at the right hand of God to rule there until all hisenemies are put under his feet. So what we want to focus on thismorning is the rest of verse 3.    
      He Sat Down at the Right Hand ofMajesty    Here is a crucial observation in the way that the writeroriginally wrote this verse: it is one clause with one subject andone main verb. Every thing else serves to shed light on that one mainassertion. The subject is "He" (or "who" in the original) -- that isthe Son of God, Jesus Christ. The one main verb is "sat down." So theone main clause of the verse is: "He sat down at the right hand ofMajesty." Everything else in the verse serves that assertion andsheds light on that.  The way to hear it is to translate it like this:  "He . . . being the radiance of God's glory . . . sat down at theright hand of Majesty."  "He . . . being the exact representation of God's nature . . . satdown at the right hand of Majesty."  "He . . . upholding all things by the word of His power . . . satdown at the right hand of Majesty."  "He . . . having made purification of sins sat down at the righthand of Majesty."  What the author here wants us to see is what makes it fitting forChrist to sit down at the right hand of God's majesty. He mentionsfour things:  He is the radiance of God's glory -- so he sat down at God's righthand.  He is the exact representation of God's nature -- so he sat downat God's right hand.  He upholds all things by the word of his power -- so he sat downat God's right hand.  He made purification of sins -- so he sat down at God's righthand.  Let's look at these connections. And as we do, ask God to illumineyour mind and heart to see the true greatness and glory of JesusChrist.    1. First, consider the connection between thework of Christ in making purification of sins and his sitting down atthe right hand of God.    We can see the connection made explicit for us in Hebrews10:12-14,  He, having offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, sat downat the right hand of God, 13 waiting from that time onward until hisenemies be made a footstool for his feet. 14 For [ note thisconnecting word! ] by one offering He has perfected for all timethose who are sanctified.  What is plain from these verses is that Christ was seated at theright hand of God to honor him for the total completeness of hissin-bearing work on the cross. He sat down at the right hand waitinguntil all his enemies are subdued,  for  by one offering he hasperfected for all time those who are being sanctified. This word"for" means that he sits in this place of honor and authority andpower  because  his offering accomplished exactly what Godwanted it to.  If you put trust and hope in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as yourSavior and Lord, Christ will be united to you in a savingrelationship and you will be given his Spirit who starts a lifelongwork of "sanctifying" you, that is, bringing your mind and heart andlife more and more into conformity to Christ. That's what Hebrews10:14 means here by "those who are being sanctified." It's those whoare banking their hope on Christ and are being changed from onedegree to the next into his image by his Spirit (2 Corinthians 3:18).  What did the self-offering of Christ accomplish for them? "By oneoffering He has  perfected for all time    those who aresanctified." In dying for us, Christ covered our sin so completelythat it can be said that we are perfected before God. That is, inChrist we are forgiven for all our sins and, to use Paul's language,acquitted and reckoned righteous. And not just for a while, but "forall time."  This is what why Christ was exalted to the honored place at theright hand of God. His sin-bearing work was perfect. The resurrectionand exaltation and coronation of Christ at God's right hand is adeclaration and celebration of his perfect work of sin-bearing.That's the meaning of Hebrews 10:13-14  He sat down at the right hand of God, 13 waiting . . . until hisenemies be made a footstool for his feet. 14  For  he hasperfected for all time those who are sanctified.  So all our worship of the risen Christ on this great Easter Sundayis a reflection of the total sufficiency of the death of Christ tocover and cleanse and remove all the sins of everyone who trusts himand enters the road to life called sanctification.  Now back to Hebrews 1:3. When it says, "When he had madepurification of sins he sat down at the right hand of Majesty," itmeans that the sitting down in this place of preeminence and honorand authority and power was a declaration of how perfect was Christ'swork of purification of sins. Christ was fitted for this place ofhonor by the fullness and perfection of his sin-bearing work for us.  I pray that you will embrace this precious Biblical reasoning.This is meant to make you strong and unshakable against the terribletemptations to doubt that your sins can be forgiven. The resurrectionand the enthronement of Christ to the right hand of God is meant tomake you confident in the hour of trial and in the hour of death thatthe purification of your sins is sure and real and sufficient to giveyou an entrance to heaven. Don't take lightly this Biblicalreasoning: Christ reigns today in heaven  because  he madepurification of sins, once for all.    2.      There isanother great work Christ does to fit him for this exalted place atGod's right hand.    Hebrews 1:3 says, "He upholds all things by the word of hispower." Literally: "He, . . . upholding all things by the word of hispower . . . sat down at the right hand of Majesty."  Why is this included here? Why mention that the whole universehangs on the word of Christ for its moment by moment existence?Because it would be a great mistake to think that we depend on Christonly for our purification and not for our very existence.  There are two things that might keep you from entering heaven andenjoying the glory of God and all his works. One is if your sins werenot forgiven. The other is if you went out of existence and all theworks of God went out of existence. So if you are to have a happyfuture in God's presence, two great works are needed: a work ofpurification of sins, and work of preservation of your existence.  How this sounds strange, I think, to modern scientific people likeus. And so it's very important that we hear it. The reason it soundsstrange is that most of us have absorbed a worldview that treatsmaterial existence and human existence as the foundational reality inthe universe. What we can see and touch and smell is real, and is themeasure of what else is real.  Now this writer calls that whole approach into question. He saysthat the foundational reality in the universe is not us or materialthings that you can see and touch; the foundational reality in theuniverse is Christ and his Word. What we think is so real is, infact, very fragile and on the brink of extinction. It hangs by aslender thread. One word from Christ and it goes out of existence --or one word   un  spoken by Christ and we go out ofexistence.  We are all heirs of the modern mindset expressed in Ren&eacute;Descartes's words from 350 years ago. He tried to build a system ofcertainty based on this famous saying: "I think, therefore I am."What's wrong with that statement? What's wrong with it is that it issuperficial. That is, it doesn't go deep enough to say what is reallysignificant about my thinking.  The writer to the Hebrews wants us to say, not, "I think,therefore I am," but, "I think, therefore Christ is." Because ifChrist were not upholding my mind and my brain and my heart and mylungs, I would cease to be. My being is witness to the Word of Christholding me in being. Forgetting this is precisely what defines fallenhuman beings. For us, what could be more real than our own existenceand what could be more unreal than talk about an unseen person whosits on a heavenly throne!  So the challenge before us this morning from this writer istremendous: will we just sing along with the modern song of humanself-sufficiency? Or will we listen to the Word of God and learn thatChrist upholds all things by the word of his power?  If we will learn from Scripture how to see ultimate Reality, wewill see that we need Christ not only to make purification for oursins, but also to provide preservation to our souls and our bodies.So Christ is doubly worthy of our dependence and trust and love andworship.  When we see him sitting at the right hand of the Majesty it is notonly to honor the work of his purification in saving us, but also tohonor the word of his power in preserving us. We owe our purificationto him and we owe our being to him.  And remember this is a person who is alive today. He is hearingeverything that is being said in this room. He can be known andtrusted and loved and worshipped. Which is exactly why these wordsare written and why he arranged it that you are here this morning.    3. There is one last reason Hebrews 1:3 givesfor Christ's sitting down at the right hand of theMajesty.    There are two more phrases in the verse to look at, but they areeasily combined, and in fact do go together: "He (Christ) is theradiance of His (God's) glory and the exact representation of Hisnature." Or, as we saw from the original words: "He, being theradiance of God's glory and the exact representation of his nature .. . sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high."  The difference between this qualification for sitting at God'sright hand and the other two is that those described what Christ did , while this describes who he  is . What he does is"uphold all things by the word of his power," and "make purificationof sins" by the worth of his blood. But what  is  he? Who is  he? That's our last question this morning. Who died forsins? Who rose from the dead? Who upholds the universe by the word ofhis power? Who is sitting at the right hand of God?  The answer is: Christ is "the radiance of God's glory and theexact representation of his nature." What does this mean? It'simportant that we take these two phrases together, because theycontrol each other and keep us on track.  When it says that Christ is the exact representation of God'snature we are to realize that to see Christ is to see God. Jesussaid, "If you have seen me, you have seen the Father" (John 14:9).Colossians 1:15 says, "He is the image of the invisible God." To seewhat God is like, you see what Christ is like.  But that could be taken in an entirely wrong way. Suppose you takeit to mean that Christ represents God the way a photograph or apainting represents a person, or the way an authorized letterrepresents the king, or the way a wax impression represents a goldenring. That would be totally wrong. And the other phrase here is meantto protect us from that misunderstanding. He is the exactrepresentation of God's nature not the way a painting represents aperson, but the way radiance represents glory. Verse 3 says, he is"the radiance of God's glory."  In other words he relates to God the way radiance relates toglory, or the way the rays of sunlight relate to the sun. Keep inmind that every analogy between God and natural things is imperfectand will distort if you press it. Nevertheless, consider for example,  1) There is no time that the sun exists without the beams ofradiance. They cannot be separated. The radiance is co-eternal withthe glory. Christ is co-eternal with God the Father.  2) The radiance  is  the glory radiating out. It is notessentially different from the glory. Christ is God standing forth asa separate but not essentially different from the Father.  3) Thus the radiance is eternally begotten, as it were, by theglory -- not created or made. If you put a solar-activated calculatorin the sunlight, numbers appear on the face of the calculator. These,you could say, are created or made by the sun, but they are not whatthe sun  is . But the rays of the sun are an extension of thesun. So Christ is eternally begotten of the Father, but not made orcreated.  4) We see the sun by means of seeing the rays of the sun. So wesee God the Father by seeing Jesus. The rays of the sun arrive hereabout 8 seconds after they leave the sun, and the round ball of firethat we see in the sky is the image -- the exact representation -- ofthe sun; not because it is a painting of the sun, but because it is  the sun streaming forth in its radiance.  So I close this morning by commending this great Person to youthat you might trust in him and love him and worship him. He is aliveand sitting at the right hand of God with all power and authority andwill one day come in great glory. He has that exalted place becausehe  is  himself God the Son; and because he upholds you and meby the word of his power; and because he made a perfect purificationof sins.  Would you not know the one who holds you in being, and offers youpurification from your sins, and reveals God to you the way lightreveals the sun?  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
