
  In the past, the Bible has been used against Asian women to justify abuse.
  But the Bible only has power when WE interpret it as life-giving. The Bible
  is a reference, a context for my people which WE use for inspiration and
  wisdom. It is the reference and WE are the text.
  
  The Bible does not give us all the answers, like how to prevent a nuclear
  war, how to deal with issues of battered women, or whether America should
  intervene in Asian countries. The norm in interpreting the Bible is to ask,
  "Is this life-giving for us, or is this death-giving?"

  One night there was a fellow who was travelling from Columbus up to Delaware.
  On the way, while stopping to change a flat, another car stopped behind him,
  and some thugs got out, beat him severely, robbed him, and took his car,
  leaving him half-dead by the side of the road. The next morning, the senior
  minister of the First Unitarian Universalist Church was driving past, and
  saw the fellow still lying unconscious in the ditch, but he was late for
  an important District meeting where he was preaching, and
  
  went on by, vowing to call the Highway Patrol as soon as he got there. Not
  long later, the Board Chair from the Unitarian Universalist Church was driving
  past on her way to some important new work. Fearing for her own safety, she
  too drove past, vowing to call the Highway Patrol as soon as she got to her
  place of work. Not many minutes later, the secretary from Ephesians Southern
  Baptist Church in Grove City, on her way to visit her sick uncle Cassius,
  saw the man prone in the ditch, and immediately stopped her car. She called
  the Highway Patrol on her cell phone, and then 911. Once she gave them the
  information, she immediately got out and attended to the hurt man, propping
  his head on her folded jacket like a pillow, wiping his wounds with a kerchief.
  When the ambulance came, she followed it to the hospital to accompany the
  poor fellow to the emergency room. She stayed with him till he gained
  consciousness, holding his hand, then calling his family, and making sure
  he would be well taken care of.

  Praise the tympani of the thunder and lightning,
  Praise the harp of the wind, and the strings of the rain and snow playing
  serenades in good season.
  Praise the sunrise, soft as the solo of a flute, or praise the sunset, as
  loud and golden as a hundred trombones.
  Praise all who sing, bright as the morning stars chorusing at the dawn of
  creation.
  Praise the keys of the piano, and the hands that play, cooperating with the
  powers of creation itself.
  Praise it! The freedom in our hearts to sing not matter how much we were
  shamed into not singing! 
  Praise it! The freedom to make every dissonance resolve in harmonies.
  Praise it! The everlasting Liberty that harmonizes human heart with human
  heart.
  Praise it! Praise the Liberty which sounds along the ages, today, tomorrow
  and until the last measure of time.
