 AUTONOMY
  
   
   
   42. Autonomy as a part of the power process may not be necessary for
   every individual. But most people need a greater or lesser degree of
   autonomy in working toward their goals. Their efforts must be
   undertaken on their own initiative and must be under their own
   direction and control. Yet most people do not have to exert this
   initiative, direction and control as single individuals. It is usually
   enough to act as a member of a SMALL group. Thus if half a dozen
   people discuss a goal among themselves and make a successful joint
   effort to attain that goal, their need for the power process will be
   served. But if they work under rigid orders handed down from above
   that leave them no room for autonomous decision and initiative, then
   their need for the power process will not be served. The same is true
   when decisions are made on a collective bases if the group making the
   collective decision is so large that the role of each individual is
   insignificant. It may be argued that the majority of people don't
   want to make their own decisions but want leaders to do their thinking
   for them. There is an element of truth in this. People like to make
   their own decisions in small matters, but making decisions on
   difficult, fundamental questions require facing up to psychological
   conflict, and most people hate psychological conflict. Hence they tend
   to lean on others in making difficult decisions. The majority of
   people are natural followers, not leaders, but they like to have
   direct personal access to their leaders and participate to some extent
   in making difficult decisions. At least to that degree they need
   autonomy.
   
   43. It is true that some individuals seem to have little need for
   autonomy. Either their drive for power is weak or they satisfy it by
   identifying themselves with some powerful organization to which they
   belong. And then there are unthinking, animal types who seem to be
   satisfied with a purely physical sense of power(the good combat
   soldier, who gets his sense of power by developing fighting skills
   that he is quite content to use in blind obedience to his superiors).
   
   44. But for most people it is through the power process-having a goal,
   making an AUTONOMOUS effort and attaining t the goal-that self-esteem,
   self-confidence and a sense of power are acquired. When one does not
   have adequate opportunity to go throughout the power process the
   consequences are (depending on the individual and on the way the power
   process is disrupted) boredom, demoralization, low self-esteem,
   inferiority feelings, defeatism, depression, anxiety, guilt,
   frustration, hostility, spouse or child abuse, insatiable hedonism,
   abnormal sexual behavior, sleep disorders, eating disorders, etc. Some of the symptoms listed are similar to those
   shown by caged animals.
   
   To explain how these symptoms arise from deprivation with respect to
   the power process:
   
   Common-sense understanding of human nature tells one that lack of
   goals whose attainment requires effort leads to boredom and that
   boredom, long continued, often leads eventually to depression. Failure
   to obtain goals leads to frustration and lowering of self-esteem.
   Frustration leads to anger, anger to aggression, often in the form of
   spouse or child abuse. It has been shown that long-continued
   frustration commonly leads to depression and that depression tends to
   cause guilt, sleep disorders, eating disorders and bad feelings about
   oneself. Those who are tending toward depression seek pleasure as an
   antidote; hence insatiable hedonism and excessive sex, with
   perversions as a means of getting new kicks. Boredom too tends to
   cause excessive pleasure-seeking since, lacking other goals, people
   often use pleasure as a goal. See accompanying diagram. The foregoing
   is a simplification. Reality is more complex, and of course
   deprivation with respect to the power process is not the ONLY cause of
   the symptoms described. By the way, when we mention depression we do
   not necessarily mean depression that is severe enough to be treated by
   a psychiatrist. Often only mild forms of depression are involved. And
   when we speak of goals we do not necessarily mean long-term, thought
   out goals. For many or most people through much of human history, the
   goals of a hand-to-mouth existence (merely providing oneself and one's
   family with food from day to day) have been quite sufficient.
   
