XIV . C O N F R O N TATI O N

W IT H A N " EX P E RT "

Malcolm X's last appearance on the airwaves took place in New York over Station WINS on the night of February 1 8, 1 965. This was four days after the bomb­ ing of his home, nine days after the Selma police had used cattle-prods and clubs to drive 1 70 students on a brutal and grueling, double-time "march" into the country­ side, and the same day that hundreds of Brooklyn stu­ dents had "rioted" in demonstrations against segregated school conditions.

It was a phone-in panel show, Contact, conducted by

Stan Bernard. The guests were Aubrey Barnette, ex-Muslim who had just co-authored an article, "The Black Muslims

Are a Fraud, " in the February 2 7 Saturday Evening Post;

Gordon Hall, an "expert on extremist organizations"; and Malcolm. In the first hour of the program, which dealt mainly with the Black Muslims and the b omb ing of Malcolm 's home, Hall's tone toward Malcolm was hostile and contemptuous. Malcolm at first tried to ignore this, but gave up the attempt in the final third of the program,

from which the following is transcribed.

Stan Bernard:   Gordon, you're a professional observer of extremist organizations, and you classify the black nationalists, and of course the Muslims, as extremist or­ ganizations. H ow do you appraise this political warfare that's going on in the black nationalist organizations? Gordon Hall: Well, to be perfectly frank with you, and I do believe in speaking frankly, I think at the moment the Muslims are a dying organization, they' re on the way out,   they've m ade no impact in the Negro community nationally at any point, and even less so now. M alcolm has   no   place to go, which is why he's floundering so

Confrontation with   a ll   "Expert"                    179

badly. F or example, he' s been breaking bread with the communists downtown -

Malcolm: What communists, what communists have

I been -

Hall: Socialist Workers Party -

Malcolm: You are absolutely out of your mind, I

have never broken bread with -

Hall: You have given several speeches which they

have reprinted -

Malcolm: Well, that's not breaking bread. I speak

anywhere, I spoke in London, England, and -

Hall: You were very glad to go back several times, and they are reprinting one of your major addresses in

The Militant -

Malcolm: I   spoke in a church, I spoke in a church in Rochester a couple of nights ago. Does that make me a Methodist? -

Hall: We.'re not talking about churches, we're not talk­ ing about churches, we're talking about the Socialist Work­ ers Party -

Malcolm: .Just because you speak somewhere doesn't make you that. You speak to the public and you speak on any platform -

Hall: Oh, I don't, Malcolm.

Malcolm: - and I speak to the public and I speak on

any platform.

Hall: I'm afraid th at's not the case, Malcolm.

Malcolm: If speaking on the socialist platform makes me a socialist, then when I speak in a Methodist church -

Hall: It w as a communist platform -

Malcolm: I was in Selma, Alabama, last week, speak­ ing in M artin Luther King's church. Does that make me a   follower   of M artin   Luther   King?   No,   your line of reasoning, sir, doesn't fit me.

Hall: I was just saying that I was asked a question by Stan, and I think that at the moment the nationalist movement has no place to go, they're floundering, and they're putting out lines everywhere.   And   there   is an alliance in the general H arlem area between some of the Peking-based communists, the Progressive Labor Move­ ment, and some of the others, the Bill Epton crowd. BUI

-----------------------------------------------------Page 92-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
180                                   Malcolm   X Speaks

Epton is a self-confessed avowed communist - you'd agree to that, wouldn't you, Malcolm?

Malcolm:   I   know nothing about what Bill Epton's

political philosophy is. Bill Epton, in my opinion, is one of the militant leaders in H arlem. Now, what his political

beliefs are, I think that he has a right to them.

Hall:   I   didn't say he. didn't h ave a right, I'm just

saying what he is. Malcolm: Well -

HalL' He h as stated to me personally Malcolm: Well, whatever they are -

Hall: I have interviewed him, he told me that he w as

an avowed communist -

Malcolm:   So whatever they are, he has a right to

them.

Hall:     and he'd like to see this system of ours com- pletely junked, as welL All I'm s aying is that there's a lot of warfare -

Malcolm: I think you'll find that a lot of the children

that a re out there in Brooklyn -

Hall: May I speak, Malcolm, m ay I speak -

Malcolm: - on the rampage against the segregated

school system here in New York C ity

Hall: May I speak?

Malco lm:    - and King and some of his followers in Alabama right now are fighting against the same system. Hall:   You're   a great clock-killer, but you don't let

other people speak.

Malcolm: Well, say your words.

Hall: I ' m trying to - if you would be kind enough

to let me speak -

B ernard: Go ahead.

Malcolm: Go right ahead, Mr. H all. Dr. H all.

Hall: Well, at any rate, they're floundering now, and there's a lot of internecine warfare going on in the H arlem section, and most of the movements are small and splinter­ ed, and are splinters of splinters. And I suppose only the future will tell which one will emerge victorious and per­

haps claim the most members. I would m ake a prediction,

and I think we could come back a year from now, Stan, and I think you m ay find Malcolm preaching a completely

Confrontation with an "Expert"                        181

separate doctrine. and leading some other kind of move­ ment

Malcolm: Well, you know, one of the best compliments that Dr. H all here can p ay me is just the things that he says. When he begins to pat me on the back, I 'll be wor­ ried -

Hall: I'm not patting you on the b ack. I told you up

in Boston ---

Malcolm:   - I said, when you begin to pat me on the

back -

Hall: - give a Uttle time and you'd be preaching a

new line, and you are.

Malcolm: I said, when you begin to pat me on the back,   I'll be worried. When you begin, people of your profesSion, who m ake a profession out of dealing with groups in this country. When you begin to pat me on the back, then I'll be worried, sir. Now I would advise you, if you think that nationalism has no influence whatsoever, the nationalists, the Organization of Afro-American Unity, are h aving a rally at the Audubon B allroom on Broad­ way -

Hall: I think you mentioned it earlier, you're getting

in a couple of plugs.

Malcolm: I'm going to mention it again. I wouldn't

come on the program and not mention it. Because one of the most difficult thlngs for nationalists to do is to let the public know what they're doing. So we're having this

.

rally at the Audubo n -

Hall: The public is engaged in a vast conspiracy

against you; it's obvious from what you say -

Malcolm: You're going to make me mention it four or five times. We're having this rally at the Audubon B all­ room this coming Sunday at 2 o'clock and people just . like you, who consider themselves experts on nationalists, . are given front-seat invitations, and I w ould advise you, since U's your profession to know what nationalists and other so-called extremists are doing, to come and be our guest. Now, one thing I'd like to point out to you, Dr. Hall, whenever you find black -

Hall: You know perfectly well I'm not a doctor,

Malcolm.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 93-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
182                                   Malcolm X Speaks

Malcolm: Well, you sound like you're an expert on something, I thought you were a doctor. Whenever you find the condition that black people are confronted by in this country, being permitted by the government to exist so long, the condition in itself is extreme - and any black man, who really feels about this situation that our peo­ ple are confronted by, his feelings are extreme. You can't take a cough syrup and cure somebody who bas pneu­ monia. And the black people are becoming more extreme every day. I was in Alabama a couple of weeks ago, be­ fore I went to England, down there with Dr. King and some of the others, who are trying to just register and vote. Now I 'll tell you frankly, with King supposed to be   the most m oderate, most conservative, most loving, most endorsed, most supported -

Hall: The word is responsible, but go ahead.

Malcolm: O. K., responsible to the white power struc­ ture. To me, when white people talk about responsible - Hall: He's a responsible American, that's what he is. Malcolm: W hen people like you usually refer to Negroes as responsible, you mean Negroes who are responsible in the context of your type of thinking. So, getting right back to Dr. King, any time you find a person who goes along with the government, to the degree that Dr. King does, and still Dr. King's followers, children, are made to run down the road by brute policemen who are nothing but Klansmen, a nd the federal government can step in and do nothing about it, I will guarantee you that you are producing extremists by the thousands. Now when I was down there, they wanted me to speak to the press, but didn't want me to speak to the church, or the children or the students. It was the students themselves that insisted that I speak, that gave me the opportunity to speak. Bernard: M alcolm, how do you think that's going to

be changed?

Malcolm: Sir, I think that -

Bernard: H ow? I mean, I know you're talking about these children being made into extremists, but how, bow is the situation going to be changed? Do you think by w arfare?

Malcolm:   It's   not going to be changed by making

Confro ntation with an "Expert"                       183

believe that it doesn't exist to the intense degree that it exists. And it's not going to be changed by putting out polls, like Newsweek magazine did last week, implying that Negroes are s atisfied with the rate of progress. This is deluding yourself. And my contention is that white people do themselves a disservice by putting out these kinds of things to m ake it appear that Negroes are satisfied when the most explosive situation, racially, that has ever existed in this country, exists right now. And all of your so-called responsible leaders, when they speak about the situation, they say everything is in check. Yet every day you find Negro children becoming   more explosive than ever -

You're not answering my question, you're avoiding it. I asked you how is it going to change? Is

it going to change through extreme behavior, let's call it extreme reaction - in other words, you are going to react extremely to a situation that you don t like? Now,

how extreme can your reaction be?

Malcolm: Well, sir, when Russia put missiles in Cuba, the only thing that made Russia get her missiles out of Cuba w as when America pointed missiles right back at Russia.

Bernard: Are you suggesting revolution?

Malcolm: No, I'm s aying this: that when you respect the intelligence of black people in this country as being equal to that of whites, then you will realize that the re­ action of the black m an to oppression will be the same as the reaction of the white man to oppression. The white m an will not turn the other cheek when he's being oppres­ sed. H e will not practice any kind of love of a Klan or a C itizens C ouncil or anyone else. But at the same time the white man is asking the black man to do this. So all I ' m s aying is, I absolutely · believe the situation can be changed. But I don't think it can be changed by white people taking   a hypocritical approach, pretending that it is not as bad as it is, and by black leaders, so-called responsible leaders, taking a hypocritical approach, try­ ing to m ake white people think that black people are patient and long-suffering and are willing to sit around here a long time, or a great deal of time longer, until the problem is made better.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 94-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
184                                   Malcolm X Speaks

Bernard: Let's go back to the phone. The W I NS Contact number: .Judson 2-6405. This is Contact, you're on the air.

Girl ( phoning in ): Hello, M alcolm? Malcolm: Yes?

Girl: The Ku Klux Klan should get you. Malcolm: H a-ha-ha-ha.

Bernard: Thank you very much.

Malcolm: L et me point something out to this lady. I'm invited to M ississippi next week. I 'll be going to Mississippi next week. The Ku Klux Klan will have all the opportuni­ ty it wants to get me. I was in Alabama last week; they had an opportunity then. You don't always have to go down South to find the Ku Klux Klan. Evidently one is your father, or you wouldn't be able to speak as you do.

Bernard: This is Contact, you're on the air.

Woman (phoning in): I ' d like to ask Mr. B arnette a question.   In Louis   Lomax's book, When the Word Is Given . . . , he says none of the rumors about the M uslims receiving help from outside, communist or segregationist sources   has   proved true. Does Mr. Barnette have any information that will verify or refute that statement? Bernard: I didn't quite get it, but Mr. Barnette has left the room. He's left the studio during this last part of the debate, and he's not here to answer it. Woman: Could M r. Hall answer it? Bernard: Could Mr. H all answer it?

Hall: I didn't quite understand your question. Could

you quote that again for us?

Woman: Yes. Louis Lomax says that none of thE rumors about Muslims receiving help from outside, com· munist or segregationist sources has proved true. And

I'd like to know what they think about this.

Hall: I would agree with Mr. Lomax's statement on that. I think that's an actual statement. I'm not so sure that that is applicable to other militant groups in the Negro community, but I think it's applicable to the M uslims.

Bernard: I'm not sure -

Malcolm: They don't get any help from outside sources? Hall: She's talking about outside communist or segre-

gationist sources.

Confrontation with an "Expert"                        185

Malcolm:    Do they get any help from   inside   segrega­

tionist sources? You're the expert.

Hall: I would doubt that very much. I have no evidence of that, and neither do you; and if you do, then -

Malcolm: I'm not saying that I do.

Hall: - put up, M alcolm. You're implying; you're a

very sly implier.

Malcolm:   Because you give me the impression, all of a sudden,   that you're   a protector of the Black Muslim movement -

Hall: Not a bit, not a bit.

Malcolm. - when it comes to rallying them against the black nationalists. Because you know that the B lack Muslim m ovement is in a bag, and has no place to go. Hall: I'm the one, I ' m the one - Just to show how faulty your logic is - let me speak. Just to show you how faulty your logic is, I arranged for the Saturday E v e n ing Post story, which you have praised with your own mouth tonight as the best thing ever written on the Black Muslims.

Malcolm: Not b ecause you arranged it - Hall: I arranged it.

Malcolm:' It's the best, not because you   arranged it. That   doesn't make it best.   It's best because Aubrey - Bernard: Mr. H all is saying that he arranged for it to be written because he thought it was valid and valuable. Malcolm: What he arranged, what he did, is immaterial

to me. I'm not com menting on -

Hall: You never want to louse up an argument with

facts, M alcolm.

Malcolm: Sir, I'm not commenting on what you did;

it's immaterial to me.

Hall: But you said it was a wonderful piece.

Malcolm: I ' m saying what Aubrey did: Aubrey is the one who did the piece. You can arrange for Rockwell to write a piece.

Hall: Aubrey came to me -

Malcolm:   You can arrange for Rockwell to write a

piece.

Hall: - because he knew that I could get this story

told in the best fashion.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 95-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
186                                   Malcolm   X Speaks

Malcolm:   You can arrange for Rockwell, you can

arrange for the Klan to write a piece. Hall: No, I could not, I could not.

Malcolm: So what you can arrange doesn't impress me. Hall: Malcolm, you know perfectly well that I couldn't.

That's just a smear.

Malcolm: Y ou could, sir. You're a mercenary.

Hal « to Bernard): You can't see the technique?

Malcolm:   No, you're a professional, you said that

yourself; that's why I call you a doctor -

Bernard: Next call, can we go on to our next call?

Now?

Hall:   I like it when he talks this way, because he

exposes himself.

Malcolm: No, I 'm exposing you as a mercenary, an

opportunist.

Bernard: Here we go, it's the next call time, here we

go. This is Contact, you're on the air.

Man   (phoning in): I'd like to direct a question to

M alcolm X.

Bernard: Go ahead.

Man: I heard him on a newsreel say that Charlie's enemies are his enemies, and this was supposed to refer to the white m an as Charlie.

Malcolm: Charlie is the Ku Klux Klan, and the White Citizens Council, and white people who practice discrim­ ination a nd segregation against black people.

Man: Right. Then I'd like to ask you, something which

you mentioned about aid from Red China.

Malcolm:   I've never mentioned anything about aid from Red China. Ask Dr. Hall here, he's an expert; I think he'll even have to agree to that.

Man: This man asked you if the aid to fight Charlie came from the Red Chinese, w ould you accept it? You said from anybody.

Malcolm: Well, that doesn't specify Red China. I said

this, that when you're in the den of a wolf, and a fox comes along and offers to help you, you'll accept help from any source available against that wolf.

Bernard: Yeah, but they asked you -

Malcolm: T his doesn't mean that you love foxes.

Co nfro ntation with an "Expert"                      187

Bernard: Did they specify when they asked you the

question whether they -

Malcolm: I don't think they said Communist China; if I recall, I could be wrong, but I don't think they speci­ fied Communist China. Although let me say this about Communist China: China is a nation of 700 million people. Physically they exist; physically they exist. I don't go along with the American reaction of pretending that 700 million Chinese don't exist. When I w as in Africa during the summer, everywhere I looked, I s aw Chinese. It's only when I get back to America that I don't see any Chinese. I just don't think it's mature to pretend that 700 million people don't exist.

Hall: That doesn't happen to be U. S. policy, to pre­ tend that they don't exist, M alcolm. You just say things that aren't so.

Malcolm: No, but I -

Hall: The United States is well aware of Red China. Malcolm: She certainly is. They just detonated some nuclear bombs over there. Plus their forces have the United States soldiers tied down in Saigon. She'd have to be well aware. She has h alf of your forces tied up. You'd be crazy not to be aware of her existence. But at the same time you're trying to give the public, the people over here, the impression that they don't exist.

Hall: You're just saying that; that's not the case at all. Malcolm:   They're human beings, just the same as

you and I are.

Bernard: You, of course, espouse recognition of Red China and her admiSSion into the United Nations? Malcolm: M any of your senators in W ashington, D. C . , espouse the s ame thing. I think most intelligent, progres­ sive people, who are up to date in their thinking, have fmally reached intellectual and political m aturity to the point where they feel that when you've got that many people on this earth, you'd better recognize them and deal

with them as human beings, and then they will deal with

you as human beings. If you say you shouldn't deal with them because they are communist, then why deal with Russia? Or if you say you shouldn't deal with them be­ cause they fought United Nations forces in Korea, then

-----------------------------------------------------Page 96-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
188                                   Malcolm X Speaks

why   deal with Tshombe? Tshombe also fought United Nations forces in Katanga. If you use the same yardstick to measure these people all the time, I think you'll end up with better results.

Bernard: All right, let's go on to our next call. Our W INS   Contact number - Judson 2-6405. This is Stan Bernard 's Contact. you're on the air.

Man (phoning in): Hello? Malcolm, I ' d like to ask you whether you feel that the recent action of the Gaullist gov­ ernment in refusing you entry into France is in any way inconsistent with France's general policy towards the Afro­ Asian community and Africa in p articular.

Malcolm: Yes, I disp atched a wire to Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State here today, dem anding an investiga­ tion into the reason why the F rench government could ban an American citizen and no reaction come from the American E mbassy whatsoever.   But I might point out, I w as in Paris last November and was successful in or­

ganizing a   good   organiztion - an  ther   one th  t   Dr.

Hall   over here can investlgate in hIS capacity - In the American Negro community in Paris, and they have been working in conjunction with the African community. And it was the African community and the Afro-American com­ munity in Paris that invited me there to address a mass rally, and the French government permitted my entry into that country. And I might point out that it was the Com­ munist   trade-union workers in Paris that J.·efused to let them h ave the hall initially, blocked their attempt to get the second hall, and eventually exercised influence in the French government to stop it. The Communist trade-union workers, one of the largest unions in that country. The reason I was in London - I had been invited there to at­ tend the first congress that had been given by the Council of African Organizations, who had a four-day congress, and invited me to make the closing address, because they were interested in the struggle of the black man in this country in his quest for human dignity and human rights. Bernard: O. K ., we're going to move on to our next

call. This is Contact, you're on the air.

Woman ( phoning in): Hello. May I speak to M alcolm

X, please?

Confrontation with an "Expert"                          189

Bernard: Yes, go right ahead.

Woman: I would like to - I don't have a question for M alcolm X.   I would like to tell him that I am 1 00 per cent with him for wh atever he goes along with toward helping the Negro. I think it's an awful shame that any­ one should   throw   a bomb into a house where there' s human beings, particularly children. And I don't g o along at all with the Muslims, the so-called Muslims, because to me they' re only teaching hate.

Malcolm: Well, I confess that I was one of the leaders in projecting the Muslim movement and causing so many people to believe in the distorted version of Islam that is taught there.   B ut at the same time I h ave to point out that there are some progressive elements, right-meaning persons,   in the Muslim m ovement. All of them are not wrong. There are many in there that mean well but are just being misled by the hierarchy, many of which do not mean well. But there is a large progressive element within the movement, and usually they are the ones who come in, they stay a year and they get disillusioned, and they go back out. B ut I was responsible for giving the people the impresSion that the Black Muslim movement was more than what it is, and I take that responsibility. You can put the complete blame upon me. B ut at the same time that I take that responsibility, I want to point out that no white man or white group or agency can use me against Elijah Muhammad or against the Black Muslim movement. W hen you hear me open up my mouth against another black man, no white m an can put words in my mouth, :nor can any white man sic me on another black group. When I have analyzed the man and the group with my own understanding, and feel that it is detrimental to the interests of the black community, then I'm going to attack it with that same intensity.

Bernard: Gordon, you were going to say something? Hall: Well, again, as you know, it's more words. He began by saying that he has to confess that he was re­ sponsible for misleading so many people on the Muslim count. There were never very many Muslims. Let's always come back to the fact that not very m a ny people wer.e

-----------------------------------------------------Page 97-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
190                                   Malcolm   X Speaks

ever misled. The white press was misled into believing there were a lot of Muslims.

Malcolm: Dr. H all -

Hall: There were never more than 15,000 Muslims in America,   and there are only now 6,000. And we have 22 million Negroes in the United States. Keep these facts uppermost in one's mind.

Malcolm: Dr. H all -

Bernard:   You   admitted   this at the very beginning,

Malcolm. You s aid the 15,000 figure is correct.

Hall: These are facts, M alcolm.

Malcolm:   Here's   another fact you have to keep in mind.   There were never m any M au M au. There never were. There were always m ore Kikuyu, more Kenyans, than Mau Mau.

Hall: What is this supposed to p rove?

Malwlm: But it w as the Mau M au who brought in­ dependence to Kenya. And the m a n that was regarded as an extremist and a monster, j us t five years ago, Jomo Kenyatta, is the president of the Republic of Kenya today; and it is thIs s ame man, who five years ago -

Hall: The situation in colonial Africa today is not like

it is in the United States.

Jfalcolm: Well; this is colonial. Any time you have a system, in 1 965, that w ill take children and let them be m arched down the road by not the criminal elements but - Bcrnard: But in numbers you have to draw one big a n alogy. In the United States, the Negro is still a minority. In   the   United Stats. And when you are talking about m inorities   within   m inorities   within minorities,   and you start   boiling   it   all down,   you   can't   really   draw that analogy with a colony.

.\faleolm :   I   s ay   this:   The M au   Mau   was   also a minority, a microscopic minority, but it was the M au Mau who not only brought independence to Kenya, but -

Bernard: Within a vast Negro majority.

Malcolm: But it brought it - that w ick. The powder keg' is always larger than the wick. The smallest thing in the powder keg is the wick. You can touch the powder all day long and nothing h appens. It's the wick that you touch that sets the powder off.

Confrontation with an " Expert "                        191

Bernard: I wouldn't want to, I   think it'll blow up. Malcolm: It's the wick that you   touch that sets the powder   off.   You go here in H arlem, and you take all these moderate Negroes that Dr. Hall here puts the stamp of approval on, and regards them as responsible - they don't explode. It's the wick, it's that small element that you refer to as nationalist and other -

Hall: You're doing all you can to encourage it,

M alcolm, with your demagogic language - Malcolm: No. no. I don't encourage it -

Hall: Oh, yes you do.

Malcolm: I don't encourage it; but I'm not going to Bernard: Don't you incite, M alcolm? Don't you incite? Malcolm: I don't think so. H ow are you going to in­ cite people who are living in slums and ghettos? It's the city structure that incites. A city that continues to let peo­ ple live in rat-nest dens in Harlem and pay higher rent in Harlem than they pay downtown. This is what incites it. Who lets merchants outcharge or overcharge people for their groceries and their clothing and other commodi· ties in Harlem , while you pay less for it downtown. This is what incites it. A city that will not create some kind of employment for people who are b arred from having jobs just because their   skin is b1ack. That's what incites it. Don't ever accuse a black man for voicing his resentment and dissatisfaction   over the criminal condition of his people as being responsible for inciting the situation. You have to indict the society that allows these things to exist. And this is where I differ with Dr. H all.

Bernard: Well. in a sense -

Hall: We differ in many places, Malcolm.

Malcolm: This is another one of the many places where

we differ, Dr. H all.

Bernard: Well, in a sense, didn't Hitler also talk about different points of view,   didn't he   say that conditions existed, and didn't he also incite?

Malcolm: I don't know anything about H itler, I wasn't

in Germany. I'm in America.

Bernard: Don't - don't, please. M alcolm - Malcolm: I say. I wasn't in Germany.

sit here and pretend that it doesn't exist.           .

-----------------------------------------------------Page 98-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
192                                   Malcolm   X Speaks

Bernard: You know about   Hitler as well as -

Malcolm: You can't point   to Hitler and Germany be­ hind what's going on here in America! Turn on the tele­ vision tonight and see what's --

Bernard: In H arlem -

Malcolm: No, no, no - turn on the television tonight

and see what they' re doing to Dr. King.

Hall: Dr. King's methods are not your methods. You

couldn't do in Alabama what he is doing.

Malcolm: Sir - sir ­

Hall: You could not do -

Malcolm:   Sir, you had better pray that I don't go and try to do what he is doing. Any time Dr. King -

Con f rontatio n with an "Expert"                       193

Bernard:   Gentlemen, time. Bell - here we go - bell.

O.   K., that's round 15. We've just had it.

Malcolm: Dr. H all, come up to the Audubon Sunday

at 2 o'clock, and we'll continue from there. Hall: I have more important things to do.

B ernard: Gentlemen, we have to move on. Time has run out. I'd like to thank all of you for showing up to­ night. Thank you very much, Gordon - M alcolm - and, of course, Aubrey Barnette . . . .

Withou confidence = 2

Hall: Oh, these are just, these are just words, M alcolm

-

Malcolm: Any time Dr. King goes along with people like you - like you - you should put forth more effort to keep him out of j ail. You should put forth more effort to protect him. And you should put forth more effort to protect the people who go along with him and display this love and this patience. If you would do more for those people and spend some of your time trying to help those people instead of trying to attack me, probably this coun­ try would be a much better place in which to live. You spend too m uch of your time, doctor, trying to investi­ gate -

Hall:   I rarely ever mention you, Malcolm, you're

hardly worth mentioning -

Malcolm: You spend too much -of your time, doctor, running around trying to keep track of dissatisfied black people whom you label as extremists -

Hall: Hardly, hardly -

Malcolm: - whereas if you would spend some of your

time in these places where Dr. King is fighting, then you .

would make this country a better place to live in.

Hall: Malcolm, I lectured all over the state of Alabama, when you had nothing to do with the Muslims or anybody else.

,lfalcolm:   Did you have on a white sheet? Did you

have on a white ·sheet? Hall: See what I mean?