INTRO.- Listen to this horror story.Get Ready to Live on $190 a Month.  NEW YORK (CNNMoney.com) -- Are you prepared to live on $190 a month when you retire?For most Americans in their 50s, that?s all the personal savings they?ll have to look forward to during retirement, according to Wells Fargo?s annual retirement survey.The survey, which polled nearly 2,000 middle-class Americans ranging from 20 to 60 years old, found that Americans aren?t saving enough, they are underestimating the amount of money they will need in retirement, and they are more likely to end up working through retirement.  (yep, like most have to!)While most Americans predict they will need a nest egg of $300,000 to live on for 19 years in retirement, the average savings of 50-somethings is only $29,000, which comes out to an income of $190 a month over 20 years assuming a 5% rate of return."$190 a month is not going to cut it," said Laurie Nordquist, co-head of Wells Fargo Institutional Retirement and Trust.  "This reinforces the huge gap in terms of what people are going to need and what people have.  They have a little time to add to that nest egg, but it?s a huge shortfall to recover."Even with Social Security or other sources of income, most people are not going to be able to cover basic needs with such a small amount of money, she added.While you would think the recession is to blame for the lack of savings -- making it harder for people to tuck away money in retirement plans -- Wells Fargo found that people saved roughly the same amount during the recession as they did before.According to the survey, only 33% of Americans have a detailed written retirement plan and 37% don?t know how much the will need in retirement or how long they will be able to live on what they have saved.Why is this horror story?  It is because if it?s true most of us are in trouble or will be in trouble financially when we want to retire.  In fact, according to this article, if it?s true, I don?t know how anybody could retire!This is either a joke or else it?s very scary!  It?s a joke in the sense of trying to save $300,000 for your retirement.  I don?t know of anyone who could do that.  There may be a few people out there who make enough money to save $300,000 but I don?t know who they are!Most people don?t trust the economy or the way our country is heading economically and in many other ways!I?ve heard people say things like, ?I doubt that social security will even be there when I get old enough to draw from it.?  I wonder as well.But let me say, we all must learn to trust.  Not the government.  Not ourselves.  Not our own ingenuity or smarts.  Not Hollywood.  But rather we must learn to trust the Lord.  This trust business could well separate the men from the boys in life.  It could well ?make us or break us? spiritually and in other ways.Proverbs 3:5-6 ?Trust in the LORD with all your heart and lean not on your own understanding; in all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make your paths straight.?Life doesn?t get much better than what this verse says to do.  If we were to trust the Lord with our whole being instead of trying to do things by ourselves and if we would acknowledge the Lord in everything, LIFE WOULD BE BETTER.  LIFE WOULD GET BETTER FOR US ALL!PROP.- In this message, as we look to a new year, let?s think about how to trust the Lord more in life.1- Trust His provision2- Trust His protection3- Trust His promiseI. TRUST HIS PROVISIONILL.- A little boy wanted $100 badly and prayed for two weeks but nothing happened.  Then he decided to write a letter to the Lord requesting the $100.  When the postal authorities received the letter addressed to the Lord, USA, they decided to send it to President. The President was so impressed, touched, and amused that he instructed his secretary to send the little boy a $5.00 bill, as this would appear to be a lot of money to a little boy.  The little boy was delighted with the $5 and sat down to write a thank you note to the Lord. It read: Dear Lord, Thank you very much for sending me the money.  However, I noticed that for some reason you had to send it through Washington, DC and as usual, those jerks deducted $95. That sounds about right, doesn?t it?  And since the economy is in such a bad shape here in America and seemingly, getting worse, we can?t help but think about our future financial situation.  What must we do?  What can we do?  We must combine our faith with common sense and common sense says that we must go to work!  We must pray and go to work!  If we want the Lord to provide for us, we must also work.  Some people might expect the US government to provide for them if they are not willing to work, but the Lord doesn?t work that way.  Of course, it?s a different if someone is an invalid or crippled, etc. and can?t work.We must combine faith with common sense.  And beyond going to work, what can we do?  What must we do?  WE MUST TRUST THE LORD TO TAKE CARE OF US, TO PROVIDE FOR US.Psalm 9:9-10 ?The LORD is a refuge for the oppressed, a stronghold in times of trouble. Those who know your name will trust in you, for you, LORD, have never forsaken those who seek you.? Matthew 6:33 ?Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.?  Of course, in Matthew 6 Jesus was speaking of food, shelter and clothing, basically.  And we often want more than the bare necessities of life, but there are many people in our world who would be happy with them.  I still believe, however, that if we put the Lord first in our lives He will provide for us.ILL.- Someone said that one old recipe for rabbit stew started out with this advice: "First catch the rabbit."  No rabbit stew without a rabbit.  Our first priority is to seek the Lord first in life but many people have their priorities mixed up.ILL.- I read one time that the founder of McDonald?s, Ray Krock, was asked by a reporter what he believed in.  "I believe in God, my family and McDonald?s," he said.  Then he added, "When I get to the office, I reverse the order."  That may have been the way Ray Krock worked but that?s not the way it?s supposed to be.  God and Christ should always be first in life and in our decisions, etc.  THIS IS GOD?S PRIORITY FOR OUR LIVES!  And when this happens He will provide for us.ILL.- Joni Eareckson wrote:  I glanced at the bird feeder and smiled.  I could understand Jesus noticing if an eagle or falcon or hawk fell to the ground.  Those are the important birds He created, the kind worth attending to.  But a scrappy sparrow? They?re a dime a dozen?Jesus said so Himself.Yet from thousands of bird species, the Lord chose the most insignificant, least-noticed, scruffiest bird of all.  A pint-sized thing that even dedicated bird-watchers ignore.  That thought alone calmed my fears.  I felt significant and noticed.  Because if God takes note of each humble sparrow?who they are, where they are, and what they are doing?I know He keeps tabs on me. ILL.- When James Gordon Bennett sent Henry M. Stanley to search for David Livingstone in Africa, he said: ?Draw on me for a thousand pounds today to provide your equipment, and when that is exhausted, draw on me for another thousand, and when that is done, draw another; but find Livingstone.? God authorizes us to draw on Him.  When one day?s supply is exhausted, we are to draw another and then another, and then another.Matthew 7:11 ?If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!?  Trust God for His provision.II. TRUST HIS PROTECTIONPsalm 37:1-3 ?Do not fret because of evil men or be envious of those who do wrong; for like the grass they will soon wither, like green plants they will soon die away.   Trust in the LORD and do good; dwell in the land and enjoy safe pasture.?If we put our trust in the Lord we will enjoy safe pasture.  Well, safe living wherever we are!  There are many evil men out in the world who want to do you harm.  When I was a kid I heard the stories about the ?boogie man? who could get you and hurt you or carry you off.  Well, the boogie man is in jail and may be there forever! At least, one boogie man!ILL.- What?s his name?  BRIAN DAVID MITCHELL.  You know, the man who kidnapped 14 year old Elizabeth Smart and held her captive for 9 months!  Of course, he didn?t JUST hold her captive only 18 miles from her home in Salt Lake, UT.  He raped her nearly every day for those 9 months.  And while he is imprisoned for the rest of his life they should string him up, etc.I read some of the transcript of that trial and what Elizabeth Smart said he did to her and the kind of man he was and I was completely horrified!  I don?t know how she kept her senses and stayed alive.  But this is not all about Mitchell.Allegations have been made against Mitchell accusing him of molesting one of his two teenage step-daughters and his own biological children.  His second wife stated to news media that she reported him to public authorities and to church authorities but no action was taken, however most of these reports were made after they divorced.  She said among other things: "I reported to four different agencies, plus the doctors knew... They were very well aware that my little 18-month-old was being molested because of what she was doing."  She also filed a police report alleging abuse but no action was taken.  Mitchell?s stepdaughter later stated that she was repeatedly sexually abused by him but that he covered it up by saying: "He would whisper in my ear not to tell anybody and if I did nobody would believe me."Brian David Mitchell is far worse than any boogie man!  And I believe there are others in our world who are just as evil.  Our children need protection.  We all need protection.ILL.- And what about that man (Ray Anthony) who walked into the St. Paul?s Methodist Church on S. Culberhouse in May of 2010?  He asked Vickie Jo Mueller for some gas money.  Mueller refused, and police say that?s when Antony stabbed her three times.  Fortunately, for Mueller, she survived and Anthony and went to jail for 150 years.  But not all stories turn out as well as this one.  There is much evil in our world.  Romans 1:28-31  28 Furthermore, since they did not think it worthwhile to retain the knowledge of God, he gave them over to a depraved mind, to do what ought not to be done. 29 They have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed and depravity. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit and malice. They are gossips, 30 slanderers, God-haters, insolent, arrogant and boastful; they invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents; 31 they are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless. When people don?t know God or don?t want to have anything to do with Him there will be much evil and many evil people in the world!Ephesians 5:15-17 ?Be very careful, then, how you live?not as unwise but as wise, making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil. Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord?s will is.? Not only must we seek the Lord?s will, we must also seek the Lord?s protection in life during these evil days.  Lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil.We should pray for and trust for protection!  Don?t expect the Lord to protect you from evil and evil people if don?t stay out of the devil?s territory and his territory is large!Psalm 37:1, 3 ?Do not fret because of evil men... Trust in the LORD and do good; dwell in the land and enjoy safe pasture.?III. TRUST HIS PROMISEILL.- A man dies and goes to heaven. St. Peter meets him at the pearly gates.  St. Peter says, "Here?s how it works.  You need 100 points to make it into heaven.  You tell me all the good things you?ve done, and I give you a certain number of points for each item, depending on how good it was. When you reach 100 points, you get in.""Okay" the man says, "I attended church every Sunday"  "That?s good, says St. Peter, " that?s worth two points""Two points?" he says.  "Well, I gave 10% of all my earnings to the church"  "Well, let?s see," answers Peter, "that?s worth another 2 points.  Did you do anything else?""Two points?  Golly.  How about this: I started a soup kitchen in my city and worked in a shelter for homeless veterans."  "Fantastic, that?s certainly worth a point, " he says."Hmmm...," the man says, "I was married to the same woman for 50 years and never cheated on her, even in my heart."  "That?s wonderful," says St. Peter, "that?s worth three points!""THREE POINTS!!" the man cries, "At this rate the only way I?m going to get into heaven is by the grace of God!"  Peter said, "Come on in!" Titus 2:11 ?For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men.?  The grace of God appeared in the person of Jesus who came to seek and save us!  Where would be without Jesus?  LOST.  DOOMED.  DAMNED.Ephesians 2:8-9 ?For it is by grace you have been saved, through faith?and this not from yourselves, it is the gift of God? not by works, so that no one can boast.? Seriously, no one can get into heaven without the grace of God.  I?m talking about the grace of God in the person of Jesus and what He did for us on the cross.  HE IS THE ONE WHO MAKES FORGIVNESS AND SALVATION POSSIBLE.I?d far rather put my trust in Him than in me for my salvation. I?m not good and I haven?t done enough to merit salvation.  Never will.  No human person is good enough or will do enough good to merit eternal life.  That?s what God?s grace is all about.  HE DID FOR US WHAT WE CANNOT DO FOR OURSELVES!  This is why it would be plum stupid to trust in ourselves for eternal life.Psalm 40:4 ?Blessed is the man who makes the LORD his trust, who does not look to the proud, to those who turn aside to false gods.?ILL.- My son said to me one time, ?Dad, I don?t know how the Lord could ever forgive me for the things I?ve done in life.?  PERHAPS YOU HAVE FELT THE SAME WAY.  Here is what I said: ?Son, I forgive you and don?t you think God is bigger than your daddy??  OUR TRUST MUST BE IN THE LORD!  If anyone can forgive us and let us into heaven, HE CAN!CONCLUSION-----------------ILL.- I like the little boy?s version of the hymn, ?Trust and Obey,? when he said that at Sunday school they had been singing ?Trust and Ok.? Good!  Everything is ok in Jesus and will be ok for us if we have committed our lives to the Lord.  He will provide.  He will protect.  And He will keep His promise of eternal life, BUT WE MUST PUT OUR TRUST IN HIM.  There is no other way.