 THERE are some persons who try to realise divinity by means of understanding or knowledge; there are others who try to realise it by means of devotion or Bhakti. In the end, both understanding and devotion are necessary for Real­ization; but devotion is often said to be the quicker and surer road to Realization, because persons ardently devoted to the Lord get knowledge through the Divine Grace because of their devotion, while those who have only knowledge may take a long time or even lives to get devotion in their hearts, which is too full with the sands of dry knowledge. There are a few fortunate souls who are gifted with knowledge as well as devotion and Saint Bahinabai is to be counted amongst these few. She lived at a time when there were no schools to educate women, and when women could not live without marriage or devote their lives to solely spiritual  purposes. 
But even in such adverse circum­stances Bahinabai attained the spiritual greatness which is clearly reflected in her book. 
Bahinabai was born in Shake 1550 at Devagaon, to the west of Ellora which is famous for its caves. She was contemporary of Tukaram who, she says, was her Master and Ramdas whom she often visited after Tukaram had passed away. The custom of child marriage prevailed at her time and she was married to an astrologer who lived at Shivpur not far from Devagaon. We know from her own biography that the name of her husband was Ratnakar and that after losing his first wife, he was remarried to Bahinabai at the age of thirty. Bahinabai appears to have been only five years old at the time of her marriage as she refers to an incident when she was eleven years old and which hap­pened six years after her marriage. Her husband was also devoted 

to God though he was not highly advanced in spirituality. Four years after their marriage, her parents came to stay with her husband. Ratnakar was also a religious priest. He lived at Rahimatpur with all of them. They lived there for two years and then they went to Kolhapur. Bahinabai was now eleven years old and she began to have a liking for the company of saints. She felt drawn towards them and she sought their company. While they were at Kolhapur, a person named Bahirambhat gave Ratnakar a black cow with her calf. Shortly the cow and the calf seemed to have an exceptional attachment for Bahinabai. She also had the same feeling for both of them. She fed them, gave them water and they (particularly the calf) accompanied her wherever she went. One day she went to a temple, as a saint named Jairam­swami was to deliver a religious lecture there. Her calf also accompanied her. She went in with the calf. But as there was not enough room even for men, some persons there took the calf outside and tied it there. It began to cry loudly and hearing this Bahinabai 
(who was only eleven years old) also began to weep. Seeing this, some people from the audience pitied her, while some began to scold her for creating disturbance. The attention of the lecturer was naturally attracted and he ordered the calf to be brought there. It became calm and quiet as soon as it was brought near Bahinabai. She then placed her head at the feet of the Saint in obeyance and to the surprise of all the persons present, the calf also placed its head on the feet of Jairamswami. Next morning the news was communicated to Bahinabai's husband. But it was badly coloured and Ratnakar did not like his wife behaving in that way in public. He tied her hands and feet and beat her, and locked her up in a room. Since that time, the calf and the cow refused taking grass and water. Bahinabai also stopped having food. Hearing this, many persons came to see them and among them was Jairamswami. He saw all of them and told Bahinabai's husband that in previous life, the cow, its calf and Bahinabai used to sit near each other and medidate. Bahinabai's meditation became 

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
complete, while that of the others remained incomplete owing to some obstacles, and that was the reason why they were born as the cow and her calf and because of their company in previous life were so much attached to Bahina­bai. Ratnakar was convinced about this and he left his wife free. But the calf even then took nothing and died shortly after this event. Just before it died, a person named Hirambhat casually said the first half of a Sanskrit stanza describing Krishna as one 'who makes the dumb speak or the lame climb the mountain'. The calf completed the stanza in human voice by repeating the other half which says, 'My obeisance to that Madhava who enjoys supreme bliss and whose grace can work all this'. It uttered the last word and breathed its last. Bahinabai's grief then knew no bounds. She lost her senses and was unconscious for three days. 
This occasion seems to have been the turning point in her life. On the fourth morning she saw in her dream a Brahmin who asked her to become awake and when she arose from unconsciousness she at once began to feel drawn towards Tukaram Maharaj and began to recite his poems. On the seventh day, she saw Master Tukaram, in a dream and he asked her not to live at Kolhapur but to go somewhere else and work for further spiritual development. When the people at Kolhapur heard the news, many persons began to come to Bahinabai's house for her Darshana; and as her husband did not like this he decided to leave her. He asked her parents to take good care of Bahinabai as she was pregnant at that time and prepared to go away from her. But as soon as he was ready to leave, he was overtaken by physical disease and was unable to go. Bahinabai has given a vivid description of his feelings during this illness in her poems. He had a burning sensation all over the body for seven days; he was crying loudly day and night and would listen to nobody. The pain was so acute that he could not take food for a month. At last he was ready to die in order to get rid of the pain. A thought now struck him that the disease and the pain might be due to what he had said about the Master of his wife and he began to repent for that. Then an old Brahmin came to his bed and told him that he should not desire death or leave his wife as long as she behaved as a good wife and that if he wished to live any more, he should accept his wife who was very much devoted to God and was worthy of being followed in that respect. Ratnakar agreed to this and bowing to him requested the Brahmin to remove the pain from his body. Bahinabai was listening to this conversation and seeing her husband repenting for what he had done she also bowed before the Brahmin, who then immediately went. At the same moment the pain of Ratnakar disappeared. 

After this event, Ratnakar began to treat his wife with respect and shortly afterwards with his wife and her parents went to see her Master Tukaram Maharaj at Dehu. He was sitting in a temple in front of the image of the Lord and Bahinabai found him exactly as she had seen him in her dream. After some days, she happened to pass in a state of trance and was in that state for three days and nights con-  tinuously. On the third day, while she was in the same state, she saw her Master telling her three Mantras. He also told her that it was her thirteenth life of spiritual pre­paration and that as she now had sufficient spiritual development, she needed no further lives and would get Realization in this life. After Bahinabai found out her Master, at Dehu, she lived there to enjoy the divine bliss of his com­pany and listened to his Kirtans (religious songs and lectures) every night. Tukaram was a Per­fect Master; but he was not a Brahmin by caste: and so to consider him as a Master was condemned by many ignorant and impudent Brahmins. So some Brahmins who lived at Dehu troubled Bahinabai for having Tukaram as her Master. Tukaram also was blamed for having Brahmin disciples. But both of them—Tukaram and Bahinabai— survived all the tests, the one as the Master and the other as the disciple; and Bahinabai enjoyed the full Divine Grace of her Master till Shake 1571. In Shake 1571, at Dehu Tukaram left his body; but Bahinabai was 
not there at that time but was at continuously prayed him to show Shioor. When she heard of the himself in the same form; and at passing away of her Master, she last her heart's wish was fulfilled. 

