 
Superman	Store

Meher	Baba:	The	ìDivine	Belovedî*
BY  DANE  RUDHYAR

 
HISTORY repeats  itself  in strange and wonderous ways. Some twenty-five centuries ago a world-wide revolution in human thought brought forth in all the main centres of civilization great men who were pioneers in the develop- ment of the intellectual faculties of the race. Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle in Greece, Gautama, the Buddha in India were the outstanding leaders in  this  arousal of the rational mind. There had been indeed great individual thinkers be- fore, but with the Sixth Century B.C. came a wave of intellectual devel- opment which changed man's attitude to nature as well as to gods, which stirred the faculties of objective observation and rational discrimination. A new human era began, the true meaning of  which we are hardly beginning to fathom because  we  are  still  only  at the
 
first or second stage of its growth.
Greek culture stressed parti- cularly the new powers of logical deduction and analytical observa- tion. They were stressed at the expense of spiritual or vital elements, and the Greek-Alexan- drian civilization was brought to a point of decadence in the hands of the sophists and of too clever, too intellectual and too ambitious men. Then, following the great law of psychological compensation, a new wave began to roll on: a wave of feeling, of devotion, of irrational belief and enthusiasm. Early Christ- ians could say: "I believe, because it is absurd". Reason was seen as an anti-spiritual factor; and faith, exalted love, utter self-surrender to the ecstasy of many religions of Oriental or semi-Oriental origin, swept      the      civilized      world,
 

 
bringing the collapse of a civil- ization which had lost its balance and had grown too far ahead of its own unconscious roots.
The same thing, with differences due to a special racial and religious background, occurred in India. Rational Buddhism was swept away from India, or, where it remained, became transformed into a religion of salvation based on principles similar to those of early Christianity. In its stead a new religious movement of unparalleled devo- tional intensity arose, centred  around the fanatic worship of Krishna, the Divine Incarnation (i.e., Avatar). The figure of Krishna, the great leader and statesman, was known before; but it took then an entirely new aspect. He became the young god, the Divine Child and Adolescent, the Divine Beloved. Orgies of devotional love flamed forth throughout India, paralleling the rapturous faith of early Christians joyously dying for their incarnate Saviour.
Thus to the rationalistic period of Greek classicism and of Buddhistic Indian civilization succeeded an era of devotional irrationalism; an era of absolute  devotion  to incarnate
 
Savioursówhich lasted until the European Renaissance, and which is still dying out in India. After the Renaissance the development of modern science and of a new rationalism, with Descartes in France and Francis Bacon in Englandóthe father of the modern experimental methodóled to the eighteenth century: the century in which all sacred and irrational rights were challenged, democracy was born in America and the Goddess Reason was officially worshipped in Paris by the revolutionists.
The nineteenth century was a peculiar combination of scientific, materialistic rationalism and of romantic, humanitarian, spiritual- istic tendencies. Mind and feelings were utterly divorced. Thus the Victorian era led to extreme psych- ological repressions and blatant egoistical self-expression, to psychological chaos and wonderful physical improvements through applied science. This was so not only in relation to individuals, but also in relation to nations. The rise of European empires, forcing material comforts and spiritual distress upon
 

 
the whole world, led to the Great War. And the world to-day is more than ever rent between the rationalism of many and wonderful beliefs, cults, esoteric groups and fads of all kinds.
The national life of many states is	characterized		by	the		same irrational		character.		The		war between fascism and communism is a	"holy	war"		whose		religious emotionalism blends curiously with considerations of economic interest. The new Germany revels in tribal ideals which are based on the most irrational factors. Irrational mass psychology	is		manipulated			by fanatics	and	showmen,		who, nevertheless,	seem		to		have		the religious conviction of leaders of crusades even though cold business interests	are		not		forgotten		in dythyrambic	orations.	A	strange world indeed! Intellect and feeling are divorced, yet reacting with a fateful compulsion upon each other ; the mental processes almost never unemotional, the feeling rarely free from	intellectual		calculation		or analysis.
Is there a way out? I believe there is.  The path  of integration of
 
intellect and feelings, of the rational with the irrational, is essentially that of psychology. Psychology is, therefore, the one key to a harmonious future; yet it is hard to use and it must be broadened and deepened before it can solve all the problems of the individualóand perhaps, through groups of indivi- duals, of nations.
How this broadening and deepening will be achieved, who knows?
This very sketchy picture of the world in which we live and struggle for sanity or for food seems a necessary prelude to the study of a personality who, to many, must appear strange and fantastic beyond words, yet who has drawn to itself an ever-increasing group of devo- tees,  both  Oriental  and Occidental
óin fact recruited from all the main cultural centres of the present world. I am speaking here of Meher Baba, the Indian spiritual leader, born near Bombay forty-four years ago, whom his followers consider to be the "Divine Manifestation" for this ageóand for all ages, in fact. This claim is not only made for him. He himself announces that he is the
 

 
Supreme Spirit who was in Buddha, Jesus and all great Teachers, the Supreme Avatar whose love draws to him those who are open and free from self.
The claim is not infrequent these daysóthough the words and  concepts in which it is formulated vary according to the racial and religious backgrounds of those making it. It is largely on the basis of its own background that each one of these claims must be considered, even though we should not forget the significance of the fact that the claim is made by a number of people.  What this fact means is obviously  that mankind is trying to compensate psychologically for the rationalistic, intellectual, objective and material- istic attitude of modern science and modern life in general. A surge of  the suppressed, irrational elements is as evident in the emotional fanat- icism of the Nazi and communistic ideologies as in the devotional self- surrender of thousands of intelligent and cultured persons to faiths based on irrational claims such as claims of Messiah-ship or incarnate divinity.
The devotees of each cult will say, of course, that their
 
own attitude is not irrational, but "super-rational"; yet they will also add that the other cults' attitudes are irrational and based on illusions. The impartial and objective observer  must therefore take a non-committal approach to all these movements and call them "irrational" inasmuch as they are founded on philosophies, beliefs or practices which do not fit  in  rational  moulds  and  have  mostly contempt for the intellectual attitude.
Here I am not to pass judgment, but only to examine trends in the light of astrological factors. In this series we have already studied the chart of a man who claims to be the representative on earth of the divine Will for the work of establishing the new era, viz., Walter de Voe. His claim is made on the basis of an American spiritual tradition which stresses a spiritualistic type of philosophy: thus he speaks of "celestial Hierarchies" of the "Chief of the Angelic Hosts," of over- coming "spirits". He is the mouth- piece for the ''Voice of the Almighty," etc.
With Meher Baba, we must remember India's background;
 

 
the Bhagwad Gita in which Krishna, the Incarnate Divinity, speaks in the first person as the "Supreme Spirit", as That of which all the manifested worlds are only a portion; the devotional tradition of the Middle Ages featuring the absolute obed- ience of the disciple (chela) to the master (guru) and the apparent irrationality of the methods used by the latter. Remembering all these things we do not find it so difficult   to listen with equipoise to a small man with strangely compelling eyes who, after thirteen years of complete silence, spells with quick fingers on an alphabetic board words like ''I am the Supreme Spirit". "I was in Christ as I was in Buddha ..."
It would seem highly intersting to study the birth-chart of such a man, who not only makes claims but may seem to substantiate themóat least  to some degreeóby demonstrating remarkable powers, especially of a psychological nature; ónot men- tioning of course the hidden effect which he is supposed to have upon world affairs in performmg actions which are, to say the least, singular and far indeed from rational standards. Fortunate-
 
ly a recent biography (The Perfect Master, by C. B. Purdom) gives official birth-data, which have been confirmed by his personal disciples and which I have but slightly  rectified by studying the events  of his life. I would not give absolute as- surance that the chart is correct, because calendars in India are likely to be confusing, and "Holy Men" usually surround themselves with secrecyóto say the least. But as it is, it is an interesting chart which has real psychological significance.
Meher Baba, whose original full name is Merwan Sheriarji Irani, was born in Poona, not far from western India's largest city, Bombay, on February 25, 1894, around 4-35 a.m. As his surname indicates he comes from old Persian Zoroastrian stock, and his grandfather was the keeper   of one of the strange "Towers of Silence" in which Zoroastrians leave their dead to be quickly destroyed by hordes of vultures. This old Persian stock emigrated from Persia after religious persecutions centuries ago and it constitutes a  significant portion of the population of Bombay and its surrounding regions.
 

 
Many of the Parsisóas they are mostly calledóoccupy leading places in industry and commerce. They are quicker and more practical than most Hindus, and sometimes they have been referred to as the "Jews of India"óa point which may be significant in relation to the subject of this study.
Meher Baba went to school in Poona, then to a college, and had a relatively uneventful youth until the spring of 1913. "One morning  in the month of May, 1913, when Meher was riding on a bicycle. . . . he looked up and saw an old woman, sitting under a neem tree. His eyes met hers and she beckoned to him. He knew who the woman was, but had had no thought of meeting her. He left his bicycle and went over to her; she arose and embraced him. From that moment Meher felt the call to the spiritual life. . . . This remarkable woman was said to be at that time 122 years old." She was a Mohammedan mystic named Hazrat Babajan and had had a most interesting spiritual life. According to Rom Landau's God is My Adventure (p. 131): "Baba himself described this incident in
 
the followihg words: Until then I was worldly as other youths. Hazrat Babajan unlocked the door to me. Her kiss was the turning point. I felt as though the universe was receding into space; and I was left entirely alone. YesóI was alone with God. For months I could not sleep. And yet I grew no weaker, but remained as strong as before. My father did not understand. . . . He called in one doctor and then another. They gave medicines and tried injections, but they were all wrong. I had lost hold of normal existence and it took me a long time to get back."
A long time indeed. "In Novem- ber 1914, he regained a little consciousness and behaved it was said, 'as an automaton possessing intuition.' His eyes ceased to be vacant and life returned to them" (The Perfect Master, p. 23). In 1915 Meher Baba and a companion visited some well-known "masters" or sadgurus, especially Upasni Maharaj, who became for a number of years Meher Baba's spiritual Teacher. After "six long years" this man succeeded in bringing Baba back to full consciousness on the physical plane.
 

 
During all these years Meher Baba seems to have acted in peculiar ways indeed. This will give an idea of this period of his life: "Almost every day he would go to the Parsi 'Tower of Silence' and sit there for hours, or go to the jungle beyond, where he would sit knocking his forehead agamst the stones. His head was bruised . . . Meher has since explained that the physical pain caused by knocking his head relieved the spiritual agony in which he was at that time." Other instances, stranger still, are record- ed, in the biography. The Western reader must, however, realise that the life of Ramakrishna and of many great Hindu saints (and also a few medieval Christian saints) con- tain many similar episodes, which would normally be considered as proofs of plain insanity. It is interesting to note that, to-day, Meher Baba is taking care of a group of ìinsaneî Hindu disciples through whom, it is said, he does part of his great cosmic work. These people are said to be highly evolved souls who, however, have not succeeded in regaining physical plane consciousness. Meher Baba selects
 
these abnormal persons carefully from many who are brought to him. Not all irrational persons of course are said to belong to that class of great Souls unable to operate rationally in the body.
At the end of December, 1921, Upasni Maharaj declared to his disciples that he had made of Meher Baba what might be called awkwardly his spiritual successoró bequeathing to him his spiritual seed-substance. In this fashion Meher Baba became a "Perfect Master" or Sadguru. To understand fully what is implied in this concept and in this transfer of seed-sub- stance or spiritual power from guru to chela (disciple) one would have to discuss many involved points. Perhaps the closest idea familiar to the Occidental mind is that of "apostolic succession" in the Catholic Church, each Pope being conceived as the direct recipient of the essence and power bestowed upon Peter by Jesus Christ.
The Hindu concept is somewhat more philosophically worked out. Seven planes of consciousness are defined. Perfection and spiritual freedom belong to the seventh plane;
 

 
Illumination  and  the   realization   of the unity of all life, to the sixth. According to Meher Baba and others, an individual may  reach  the  sixth plane alone; but in order to  return  from this realization of unity to outer consciousness and  gain  the  free  use  of all planes one needs to be initiated  by one who is a "perfect master". .A. mysterious  something  is   needed which can only be transferred  from  one who has achieved to the disciple who is ready for the "gift". This is a universally accepted idea on the wholeóeven though it is colored by racial  philosophies.
I cannot detail the many unusual occurrences which followed Meher Baba's "assumption of power". I must, however, add that, it is said, he is unique in being the "spiritual Charge" of, or heir, to not only Upasni Maharaj but also to the old woman mystic Hazrat Babajan, who was also a perfected being. At any rate, in May, 1922, he began to  gather followers in an ashram (retreat). Later a second one was formed. Various journeys were undertaken around India, in Persiaó all filled with most extraordinary events.
 
Soon after July 10, 1925, Baba declared that he was to observe a period of complete silence. Until the present day he has not broken his silence. He communicates with people by pointing with his fingers   to letters written on a small board which he carries always with  him. He also uses a great deal of mimicry, and many who have stayed with him say that his gestures and the whole emanation of his being are so eloquent, so dramatic often, that one hardly notices he does not speak. Disciples are usually at hand to read what he writes on the board for visitors. He does it so fast that some degree of practice in following him  is indeed necessary.
Why this silence? The practice is not infrequent among Hindu yogis. Several living to-day have not talked for many years.  Meher  Baba's silence has attracted publicity because of his world-wide contacts and of his repeated  promises  to break this silence in a spectacular manner. Conservation of psychic energy is the basic reason for long silence. Vocal energy can be compared to sex energy, and silence is thus a form of social asceticism.
 

 
The Meher Ashram was opened in 1927. It included a school for boys  of all castes, Hindus and Persian. Strange emotional and devotional displays occurred which have been frequently misinterpreted. These, which happen so often among adult followers of Baba, were even more evident among boys. A magazine,  the Meher Message, was started which proclaimed Baba as the great Avatar for this age, calling him "His Divine Majesty". Later the magazine was discontinued, its editor turning against Baba. Then, after some English persons of note had come in touch with him and had become his close followers, Baba sailed for Europe in 1931 and later  for America. His stay in America in  1931 and again in 1932  aroused  great attention. He was to break his silence in Hollywood in June 1932, but left for China and cancelled his widely publicized appearance in the Hollywood Bowlócausing a great deal of difficulties to those who had sponsored him. This constant changing of plans is a striking  feature of Baba's behaviour. Every day plans are changed. No one  knows among his followers
 
what will be done the next day. And as he demands absolute obedience from his followers, strange and startling things do happen which, to the outsider, seem utterly irrational, to say the least.
In America his first and most devoted disciples were Malcolm and Jean Schloss, well known in occult circles. In Hollywood Meher Baba attracted the attention of several motion picture celebritiesóactors and writers. In New York prominent society leaders, members of European aristocracy such as  Princess Matchabelli and Countess Tolstoy, became completely  taken  by his message. Some turned into ardent devotees and followed him to India in 1936. A new ashram was built in Nasik near Bombay for Western disciples with comfort rare to find in India. This, however, was again broken up after six months. The whole group of disciples was transferred to the Riviera, but three months later this also was given up and the disciples have been sent to many countries; the United States, Mexico, France, England, Switzer- land and India. Today the world is still waiting
 

for  Meher  Baba  to  speak   and  his	work.  When  this  will  be,    no  one devotees for the full manifestation of	knows. Then, it is said, the  New Age his planetary	will begin.
