

Sadguru is Love IncarnateÜ 

A Perfect Master is a pure being and as it is pure love that he causes in man, he creates what no man can. Baba says: "It must be borne in mind that the highest human love is not the highest absolute love. The divine love is the highest aspect of the all-pervading love." 

One who gets divine love gets God. The divine love is beyond reason and intellect. Nobody can create this high≠est aspect of love in himself. The divine love is given and not created. It is a grace from the God-man. 

    Philosophies and intellectual gym≠nastics make you intellectually certain about the existence of God. But it is only the love for God, the divine love, that enables one to find Him, to see Him actuallyóand become one with Him. 

Oneís spiritual progress can never be steady and certain without the divine love. It is the real side of religion and the only element which reveals or un≠folds the emotionality of the spiritual path. 

The highest love is the one which is devoid of all hopes, interests, desires and expectationsóin other words, which is perfectly selfless and disin≠terested. 

Unless a person is spiritually mind≠ed, he or she cannot be 



* In the original 1st, 2nd and 4th lines end in the word murdam i.e. I died. 

Ü Extracts from Shri Meher Baba's Discourses. 

possessed of this aspect of love.  spiritual path.  

    Divine love makes his captive forget  The divine love knows no law. It is  

his own individual existence by making  above all rules and regulations, above  

him feel less and less bound in his  dogmas and rituals.  

onward march by the trammels of  Nothing can bind it and nothing can  

human limitations, till he reaches a  set bounds to it. It is fireóan infinite  

point where he can raise himself to the  fire in itself, and those who burn in it  

realization of the highest in himself.  get purified.  

Unless and until one is possessed of  Bear it in mind that only the divine  

it, one can never feel ecstacy, one can  love can bring about self-annihilation  

never behold illuminations and visions  which gives self-realization, which can  

relating to the different states of the  make man lose his individual existence  

in the universal existence.  

ï  


