



Impressions 

BY WILL BACKETT (London)

 I first heard of Shri Meher Baba through a chance glance at a copy of "The London Forum" in the reading room of a Society in London which I happened to be visiting. This impressed my wife and me so much that we decided to get into touch with the writer to judge of the extent of his exper≠ience while with Baba. We then determined to meet the Master, but to guard ourselves from any psychic or hypnotic influence. All doubts vanished before Baba's pure ineffable radiance, when that great opportunity arrived, and on looking back we still realize the wonder of Baba's presence then. I sat quietly holding His hand. He smiled. The pure radiant Love Divine enfolded my sole being. I kissed His hand as I rose to go, and then turned again on the way to the door, to give an Indian salute. Perhaps I did it badly, but Baba smiled again in His beau≠tiful way as an old old friend. Awkward and self-conscious one may be in such a Presence for the first time, that smile put me at perfect ease. We knew we had met our Master and that a new life had opened. 

    During the following years, I had many opportunities of meet≠ing Baba and writing to Him and also receiving letters from Him in connection with the work He gave me to do at the London office. Though He was not present, I would hear His voice speaking to me in tones more wonderful than any sound I had heard, though I have never heard His natural voice in this incarna≠tion. On waking from sleep, I would even feel His physical presence, closer t o me than my own. Once in particular, I remem≠ber, whilst taking a bath, that I saw His form like a cameo in the distance as if looking through the "wrong end" of a telescope, and with that came the realization that the leg I was bathing was actually His and not mine at all. These psychic experiences brought a great realiza-



tion of His nearness, and, I now realize, were in a sense prophetic of the time when by His Grace the union would be established outwardly as well as within. 

Even in the public streets Baba's presence and power would manifest above the physical conditions of crowded London. After our first visit at Kitty Davy's house, we were mounting the steps of Charing Cross Station, when one of three out-door ex≠periences occurred to illustrate Baba's constant presence and power. 

    We passed a railway porter on the steps approaching Charing Cross Stationójust one of the crowd, but very tall and with his face seared with marks of de≠bauchery. I happened to catch sight of him, and, at that very moment, his face changed, and for the moment it became the face of Baba. 

    About two years afterwards, I passed another man in the street of Leicester Square. He came upon me suddenly, just in time for me to see that his face was full of the signs of a loathsome disease, and his eyes filled with the blackness of despair. It gave me such a shock that I walked on as if stunned, and then, as if a wave passed through me without any effort of my own, a great sense of love flowed out from me to him and through him to all humanity. It was not just ordinary love for an unfortunate person, but the love that Baba had given me Himself, the Divine Love pouring itself out without any effort on my part. 

    On the third occasion I was watching the crowd disperse after the Lord Mayor's Show at North≠umberland Avenue. As they filled the roadway where the procession had passed, it seemed as if the mass of people became each separately connected with me by an invisible cord from me to each person surging in the great open space, so that I was connected with all and yet with each one separately. Now that with which I was connected in each person was Baba Himself. 

    The office gave opportunity for successive interviews with many people, sometimes over a period of more than twelve months and at frequent intervals, so that one could see 



clearly the effect of Baba's Love on the character and con≠sciousness of people, young and old, who came to speak of their troubles and t o whom one could silently pour out His Love and sometimes speak of His Presence, Power and Love. A full record of these would fill volumes. 

Some were not without hu≠mour, as for example, where members of the same family were concerned, and one inter-view would cease a few minutes before the second called, with-out knowing of the visit of the first one; had they met, complications would have ensued as neither knew that the other was in touch with Baba 's office, o n the same subject which interested them both. 

Many times He would giveguidance through dreams, appearing in person and even in sleep, to give a message to the one who was seeking His help in daily life. They were obviouslyreal experiences as they would record some of Baba's charac≠teristic remarks and actions in ordinary life, such as "Don't worry, I will help you." He would stroke the arm of such a person in a dream, or appear to them, so 

that they could observe the char≠acteristics of His face, hands and fingers on waking, and remember them, although they may not have met Him in real life. 

One youthful and obstinate seeker whose visits were spread over a long period was very argu≠mentative, and although the argu≠ments put forward were de≠feated, that was not sufficient to alter the conduct which was so much against the party's own interests. As in daily life one could watch Baba's working out for this person allowing the difficulties to become more acute, until a serious crisis occurred which pulled up this obstinate seeker when he came into conflict with some of the authorities on the material plane. Even here Baba manifested His power and guidance in the law courts where the case was tried. And to the surprise of all concerned, justice was tempered with mercy in the verdict which proved the turning point in the career of the one who actually became a definite dis≠ciple of Baba's through all these events, before meeting Him. 



(To be continued) 

ï 