
Sir:—I submit this letter in confirmation of your observation in the Editorial of the December "Forum" that "self-cultivation" must eventually give place to "self-surrender" and in witness to my faith in Shri Meher Baba as a spiritual awakner and regenerator. 
Obviously, the only adequate proof of the faith that is in one is in a "changed Life". But since the fruits of such a change will be visible only through living the life, and not merely writing or talking about it, I shall have to confine my ''confession'' to the causes which produced the change. 
Seventeen years before meeting Baba, I experienced my first spiritual awakening. It came about through the agency of an Anglican priest who conducted a "mission" in our parish church. As a result for his powerful appeal for changed lives,  I voluntarily made 
• 
my confession, and immediately there followed into my soul the joy and love of Christ. From hence­forth my life was oriented to Him instead of to the "World and the Flesh". To serve Him was my one desire. The ecstasy of the year following this conversion can only be understood by one who has experienced it. But gradually a dark cloud descended. Heart­breaking disillusionment followed. Finally utter darkness filled the place where light had been. Being young I had not learned to distinguish between the "Channel" and the "Power". A simple lesson it would seem, but it took me many years to learn it. 
During this period of darkness, I struggled to find again that centre of light and peace, but the Church no longer held for me the key. It was then that I turned to the study of 


esoteric truth, and the circum­stances of life seemed to foster this procedure. 
"Self-cultivation" now absorbed my interest. Meditation, concen­tration, reading, study and service—these would open again the door, my preceptors assured me. And once, for a few weeks, the door did open and light poured in, but it was only another temporary glimpse. After this a sort of twilight state remained. Then I redoubled my efforts. Surely, God had not given me so intense a desire for union with Him merely to thwart it. Could I not serve Him far more effectively if I were filled with His light? Thus I argued with myself, but still the semi-darkness prevailed. It was in this state of mind that I met Baba, when he came to us on his first visit to the United States. 
I think it only right to affirm that upto this time I was not interested in ''Masters". My early experience, coupled with the loose talk about Masters and disciples of which I had heard too much, had bred in me the "impersonal" approach to Deity. I was much more of Krishnamurti's mind regarding this. 
"Every man his own Master." 
But then life through a series of amazing circumstances, threw us into the range of Baba's influence, and, though thousands of miles separated us from him, we, my husband and myself, felt the compelling beauty of his spirit. 
His coming to the house we had prepared for him, the wonder and the glory of the days that followed, the tremendous quickening that took place in many of us, that is a story in itself. But there began in those first days the self-surrender which is still going on. 
Without uttering a word, or apparently doing anything, he awakened in one a love so great, so divine, that it seems a small thing, a wholly inadequate thing, to surrender one's life to his service. To say and live "Thy will be done" in every detail of life would seem to be the only possible attitude for a sincere spiritual aspirant. 
Permanent illumination did not then take place. Baba explained that this is impossible until all of the ego is eliminated. When the little Self is annihilated with its pride of 

intellect and accomplishment, then the greater life flows in and abides for ever. And it is here that the aid of a Master, such as Baba, is needed. In the natural course of a life, circumstances usually contrive to rid us of a bit of ego, and if we are honestly trying to co-operate with God in His methods for our liberation, we may succeed in lopping off large slices of self. But the permanent and complete operation is only possible through the agency of a Perfect One. So Baba has told us, and my own experience in tackling the wary Beast of Self leads me to suppose that he is correct. 
After Baba left us, two years ago last December, the "eliminating" process began, and it is here that the co-operation of the disciple is required. 
It amuses me to hear the frequently expressed opinion (which I myself once had) that being the disciple of a Master involves no self-effort. In one sense this is true. The effort for enlight­enment ceases. "Self-cultivation" gives way to "self-surrender". The energies are turned in a different direction, and any effort now is for the honest facing of one's short­comings; for courage in the dark places; for patience under the daily irritations; for faith which believes and loves even when the reasoning mind fails to understand. This to me is what the preliminary stages of discipleship involves. And if any­one thinks it a lazy man’s job, I suggest he try it! The more subtle forms of self do not relinquish their hold merely for the asking! 
But however unceasing this effort may be, it is enhanced by the love of the Master who inspired it. All along the way one is aware of the Beloved Presence. There are, of course, periods of testing, the seeming withdrawal of the Spirit, but, contrary to my former experience, I find now that even in the darkest places—and there have been many—the presence of Baba, guides, comforts and strengthens! 
And to those who may question the "personal" guidance of a Master in human form, I can only say that the sense of guidance which I now have, is of the same quality as in the early days when the Christ not in human form guided my life. The difference now lies in 

the degree of intimacy which that sacred companionship holds for the disciple. It is this experience of my own which I have seen duplicated in the lives of many who have come in contact with Baba which leads me to believe without question that when he speaks, the universal quickening which he foretells will indeed take place. 
Yours sincerely, 
J. S. 
