Meherabad 

INTERESTING FACTS ABOUT ITS FOUNDATION 

BY F. H. DADCHANJI

 Shri Meher Baba's colony at "Meherabad" has been one of the most important centres of his activities in India for about fifteen years. It is situated on the outskirts of Arangaon, a small village six miles from Ahmed≠nagar City, the history of which can be traced to the Mogul period. This region has been the abode of many saints and hermits for several centuries, and its religious importance dates back to the hoary times of Rama. A place of pilgrimage and also of recreation, not far from Ahmednagar, is known as "Happy Valley" where Rama and Sita took refuge during their Vanvas or wanderings in jungles. Some historical facts, concerning the sanctity of this locality due to their saintly associa≠tions, are worth recording. 

There is in Arangaon a temple dedicated to Shri Vithoba, the deity of Pandharpur, who lived about a thousand years ago and who is still worshipped by multitudes. Pandharpur, two hundred miles from Arangaon is, even today, considered one of the greatest places of pilgrimage in India and Vithoba's devotees flock there twice a year during the festivals. It is said that on account of Vithoba's presence, during a period in Arangaon, the village came to be known as Choti Pandhari (small Pandharpur) and as such has been revered to this day. 

    A Hindu saint, Buvaji Buva, who lived in Arangaon about three hundred years ago, was the great Bhakta and Sat Purush. The legend goes that once when there was a Kirtan (religious recital) in praise of Vithoba at Arangaon in Vithoba's temple, the saint in a spiritual trance suddenly began to rub the palms of his hands against each other. This strange gesture made the gathering of the devotees wonder, and upon enquiry as to its purpose, Buvaji himself 



is said to have explained that he was extinguishing a fire which was blazing at the time in the sabha-mandap (hall) in Vithoba's temple at Pandharpur. Strangely, however, both the hands of Buvaji Buva bore stains of black smoke. The information subsequently obtained at Pandharpur accurately col≠laborated the statement of the saint that a fire had actually broken out in the temple of Vithoba at Pandharpur and was extinguished exactly at the time when Buvaji made that significant ges≠ture during the religious ceremony at Arangaon. It is thus a recorded fact that Buvaji Buva, through his gesture, had extinguished the fire at a distance of two hundred miles. Furthermore this saint is said to have buried himself alive and his Jivant-Samadhi (living internment) still exists in Vithoba 's temple at Arangaon village in a sepulchre. Ever since that time he is held in great reverence and wor≠shipped by the people at his shrine. 

Another recent personage, known locally, was a Mohamedan saint who lived in Ahmednagar  City. His name was Hazrat Maulana Shamsuddin Chisti, popularly called "Maula Baba ". He lived a secluded life, completely aloof from public activities, and never accepted any gifts. He was, therefore, very little known even to the inhabi≠tants of Ahmednagar where he lived for many years. Those who knew him and had had personal contact said that his life, habits and character were ex≠emplary and bespoke the dignity of a true saintly Being. Once he asked his followers to drive towards Arangaon. When he arrived at a distance of two furlongs from Arangaon where "Meherabad" stands today, near the well, he ordered a halt in order to take a walk around. After a while, about seventy-five feet from this well, he marked out with his stick a square in the dust expressing the wish to his devotees that he would be very pleased if his body, after his passing away, be interned there. The disciples wondered why of all the good locations in and around Ahmednagar, where he had lived almost all of his life, he should select this distant spot that appeared so desolate and would be so 



inconvenient for his devotees who would later desire to pay their respects. To this the Saint smilingly remarked: "You are like children, you would not now understand if I told you what great importance this place bears. You think that those who want to pay their respects to my tomb would hesitate to come to this place so distant and desolate. But remember, very soon after I pass away, a great Master will come and establish his abode here. Then you shall know and understand." This significant prophecy, made in 1922, came to be realized within two years when Meher Baba in 1924 estab≠lished at "Meherabad" the centre for his public activities. The fact that this particular area is so rich with holy memories and, also, the fact that the present heads of the spiritual hierarchy of the world have their seats in these surroundings of Ahmednagar and Poona districts, seem to be weighing factors for Meher Baba to select this place which, ever since, has been preferred as his residence and the centre of his activities. Within this spiritual environment  live five Perfect Masters who control the spiritual des≠tinies of our era. 

In Poona lived the late Hazrat Baba Jan, a Perfect Master, whom young Merwan (now known as Meher Baba) met when he was nineteen. It was through her spiritual contact that Meher Baba experienced the superconscious state. 

    Sakori, 53 miles from Ahmednagar City, is the present abode of Shri Upasani Maharaj, who is Shri Meher Baba's other Master. 

    Just three miles from Sakori is Shirdi where lived the late Shri Sai Baba, the spiritual Master of Shri Upasani Maha≠raj. 

    Kedgaon, about fifty-nine miles from Poona, is the present centre of another Sadguru, Shri Narayan Maharaj. 

    From all this, it can be clearly seen that it was not by mere 'chance ' that Meher Baba selected "Meherabad" as the centre for his initial public spiritual activities, as indeed we know that whatever Perfect Master does is for deep and significant spiritual reasons relating to his work for the spiritual benefit of mankind. 

    Strange as it may seem materially considered, the district of Ahmednagar is notorious as one of the driest and famine-stricken districts in India, having very little or practically no rainfall as compared to other parts of the country. The surrounding districts of Poona and Nasik have an average of forty to fifty inches of rainfall during the monsoon season as compared to only 15 to 20 inches in Ahmednagar district, and even this scanty rainfall is very irregular, some years passing off with hardly 6 to 8 inches of rainfall at the most. 



The choice of a place in a famine-stricken district may seem incompre≠hensible from the ordinary point of view, but the lives and activities of all great Masters and saints have been strange and incomprehensible for human intellect. Yet, if one considers the backgrounds, such as the barren hills around Jerusalem, or the desert lands around Mecca, or even the parched soil surrounding Assisi, this would seem to be in conformity with the lives of martyrdom of the Great Ones. History repeats itself, and these difficult conditions in the principal centre of activities in "Meherabad" bear testimony to this, as also to the teachings and life of Shri Meher Baba. Answering the question of his mandali as to why they always had to suffer through the handicap of water scarcity, Baba once humorously remarked: "Mohamed 's greatness was not in Ka'ba but in Karbala and this is my Karbala. " Ka'ba in Mecca, Arabia, is the sacred sanctuary where the Prophet Mohamed manifested himself and his mission, whereas Karbala in North Arabia is known in history as the place of martyrdom. Karbala is not only dry and barren but typifies desolation and destruction. Baba's reference to Karbala's true greatness conveyed that the greatness of a Master lies not in manifestation but in suffering in the cause of humanity. 

The water scarcity that has been a continuous handicap throughout a11 developments at "Meherabad" is an experience too well-known to the mandali all these years and quite in conformity with the Master 's training for a life of true renunciation. Yet, it may be carefully marked that whenever Baba wanted, this and all other consequent difficulties have been overcome and solved. The remarkable activities displayed in this place which he qualified as Karbala, have left indelible marks in the hearts of those who have been associated with him during the various phases of his initial activities. Baba has given ample proof and evidence, not alone of his infinite powers, controlling and superceding even the elements, but also of his divine motive and his selfless dedica≠tion for the well-being of mankindó especially the poor and needyóseekers and sinners a like. Throughout his life and activities in this colony, Baba has established for various periods a number of institutions of public welfare and service, such as: the school for boys and girls; the Ashram for over a hundred boys with board and lodging arrangements and with free supplies of clothing and books; the Sadhak Ashram, a retreat for seekers, here named after the Sadhakas which means seekers; as well as the dispensary, hospital and leper asylum; the Dharmashala (resting house) for trave-lers and pilgrims; also the residential quarters for large number of the regular mandali serving at "Meherabad". In short, life in this colony numbered at times from four to five hundred inhab≠itants. Besides on special festivals and holidays like birthday celebrations of Shri Meher Baba, also of Shri Upasani Maharaj, of Hazrat Baba Jan and even of Rama and Krishna observed here during these years, several thousands at a time have gathered from all corners of the countryówhen "Meherabad" was truly a place of pilgrimage. 



For years at a stretch, it is this holy solitary well which has supplied water, even for gardening, although at times it ran down to an alarmingly low level. Even last year, during Baba's visit to France when he left instructions to the mandali for important alterations to be made to the existing quarters on the hill, the mandali had to call on Baba's grace, through a special cable, as the well at a certain period due to failure of rainfall had practically dried out, threatening life and activity at "Meherabad". Baba quietly replied to this, not by cable, 



but by a casual letter, instructing:"Carry on, don't worry." When Baba 's letter from France, conveying this reply, was dispatched, an immediate downpour occurred in "Meherabad" and the water level rose to sufficiency. The danger was averted and the work was carried on as had been directed. 

    Do not Masters play with nature and the elements as they do with souls? How lightly and unconcernedly they look upon our worries and smile at the most dangerous and intricate problem, at times involving question of life and death. Numerous experiences of this playing with the elements and even with human lives have convinced the mandali, time and again, that Baba is capable of doing anything at his sweet will, handling any situation however delicate or dangerous with a calm ease and unconcern that he alone com≠mands. 
