The Avatar 
BY SHRI MEHER BABA 
Consciously or unconsciously, every living creature seeks one thing. In the lower forms of life and in less advanced human beings, the quest is unconscious; in advanced human beings, it is conscious. The object of the quest is called by many namesóhappiness, peace, freedom, truth, love, perfection, Self-realization, God-realization, union with God. Essentially it is a search for all of these, but in a special way. Everyone has moments of happiness, glimpses of truth, fleeting experiences of union with God; what they want is to make them permanent. They want to establish an abid≠ing reality in the midst of constant change.  
    It is a natural desire, based fundamentally on a memory, dim or clear as the individual's evolution may be low or high, of his essential unity with God; for every living thing is a partial manifestation of God, conditioned only by its lack of knowledge of its own true nature. The whole of evolution, in fact, is an evolution from unconscious divinity to conscious divinity, in which God Himself, essentially 
eternal and unchangeable, assumes an infinite variety of forms, enjoys an infinite variety of experiences and transcends an infinite variety of self-imposed limi≠tations. Evolution from the standpoint of the Creator is a divine sport, in which the Unconditioned tests the infinitude of His absolute knowledge, power and bliss in the midst of all conditions. But evolution from the standpoint of the creature, with his limited knowledge, limited power, limited capacity for enjoying bliss, is an epic of alternating rest and struggle, joy and sorrow, love and hate, until in the perfected man, God balances the pairs of opposites and transcends duality. Then creature and Creator recognize themselves as one; changelessness is established in the midst of change, eternity is experienced in the midst of time. God knows Himself as God, unchangeable in essence, in≠finite in manifestation, ever experiencing the supreme bliss of Self-realization in continually fresh awareness of Himself by Himself.
   This realization must and does take place only in the midst of life, for it is only in the midst of life that limitation can be experienced and transcended, and that subsequent freedom from limitation can be en≠joyed. This freedom from limitation assumes three forms. 
   Most God-realized souls leave the body at once and forever, and remain eternally merged in the unmanifest aspect of God. They are conscious only of the bliss of union. Creation no longer exists for them. Their con≠stant round of births and deaths is ended. This is known as mukti or liberation. 
   Some God-realized souls retain the body for a time, but their consciousness is merged completely in the unmanifest aspect of God, and they are, therefore, not conscious either of their bodies or of creation. They experience constantly the infinite bliss, power and knowledge of God, but they cannot consciously use them in creation or help others to attain liberation. Nevertheless, their presence on earth is like a focal point for the concentration and radiation of the infinite power, knowledge and bliss of God; and those who approach them, serve them, and worship them are spiritually benefited by contact with them. These souls are called Majzubs and this particular type of liberation is called videh-mukti or liberation with the body. 
   A few God-realized souls keep the body, yet are conscious of themselves as God in both His unmanifest and His manifest aspects. They know themselves both as the unchangeable divine essence and as the in≠finitely varied manifestation. They experience them≠selves as God apart from creation; as God the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the whole of creation; and as God who has accepted and transcended the limi≠tations of creation. They experience constantly the absolute peace, the infinite knowledge, power and bliss of God. They enjoy to the full the divine sport of crea≠tion. They know themselves as God in everything and are, therefore, able to help everything, spiritually, and to make other souls realize God, either as Muktas, Majzubs or Sadgurus as they themselves are called. 
   There ate fifty-six Sadgurus or Perfect Masters in the world at all times. They are always one in conscious≠ness. They are always different in function. For the most part, they live and work apart from and unknown to the general public, but five, who act in a sense as a directing body, always work in public and attain to public prominence and importance. In Avataric per≠iods, the Avatar, as supreme Sadguru, takes his place as the head of this body and of the spiritual hierarchy as a whole. 
   Avataric periods are like the spring-tide of creation. They bring a new release of power, a new awakening of consciousness, a new experience of lifeónot merely for a few, but for all. Qualities of energy and aware≠ness, which had been used and enjoyed by only a few advanced souls, are made available for all humanity. Life, as a whole, is stepped up to a higher level of con≠sciousness, is geared to a new rate of energy. The tran≠sition from sensation to reason was one such step; the transition from reason to intuition will be another.
 This new influx of the creative impulse takes, through the medium of a divine personality, an in- carnation of God in a special senseóan Avatar. This Avatar was the first individual soul to emerge from the evolutionary process as a Sadguru, and he is the only Avatar who has ever manifested or will ever manifest. Through him, God first completed the journey from unconscious divinity to conscious divinity, first un≠consciously became man in order consciously to be≠come God. Through him, periodically 
God consciously becomes man for the liberation or 
mankind.
 The Avatar appears in different forms, under different names, at different times, in different parts of the world. As his appearance always coincides with the spiritual birth of man, so the period immediately pre≠ceding his manifestation is always one in which humanity suffers from the pain of the approaching birth. Man seems more than ever enslaved by desire, more than ever driven by greed, held by fear, swept by anger. The strong dominate the weak; the rich oppress the poor. Large masses of people are exploited for the benefit of the few who are in power. The individual who finds no peace or rest, seeks to forget himself in excitement. Immorality increases, crime flourishes, religion is ridiculed. Corruption spreads throughout the social order. Class and national hatreds are aroused and fostered. Wars break out. Humanity grows desperate. There seems to be no possibility of stemming the tide of destruction. 
   At this moment the Avatar appears. Being the total manifestation of God in human form, he is like a gauge against which man can measure what he is and what he may become. He trues the standard of humanity by interpreting them in terms of divinely human life. 
   He is interested in everything, but not concerned about anything. The slightest mishap may command his sympathy; the greatest tragedy will not upset him. He is beyond the alterations of pain and 
pleasure, desire, and satisfaction, rest and struggle, life and death. To him, they are equally illusions which he has transcended, but by which others are bound, and from which he has come to free them. He uses every circumstance as a means to lead others towards Reali≠zation. 
   He knows that men do not cease to exist when they die, and therefore, is not concerned over death. He knows that destruction must precede construction; that out of suffering is born peace and bliss; that out of struggle comes liberation from the bonds of action. He is only concerned about concern. 
   In those who contact him he awakens a love that consumes all selfish desires in the flame of the one desire to serve him. Those who consecrate their lives to him gradually become identified with him in consciousness. Little by little their humanity is absorb≠ed into his divinity, and they become free. 
   Those who are closest to him are known as his circle. Every Sadguru has an intimate circle of twelve discip≠les, who, in point of realization, are made equal to the Sadguru himself, though they differ from him in function and authority. In Avataric periods, the Avatar has a circle of one hundred and twenty disciples, all of whom experience realization, and work for the liber≠ation of others. 
   Their work is not only for contemporary humanity, but for posterity as well. The unfoldment of life and consciousness for the whole Avataric cycle, which has been mapped out in the creative 
world before the Avatar took form, is endorsed and fixed in the formative and material worlds during the Avatar's, life on earth. 
The Avatar awakens contemporary humanity to a realization of its true spiritual nature, gives liberation to those whose are ready, and quickens the life of the spirit in his time. For posterity is left the stimulating power of his divinely human example, the nobility of a life supremely lived, of a love unmixed with desire, of a power unused except for others, of a peace untroub≠led by ambition, of a knowledge undimmed by ill≠usion. He has demonstrated the possibility of a divine life for all humanity, of a heavenly life on earth. Those who have the necessary courage and integrity can follow when they will. 
   Those who are spiritually awake have been aware for some time that the world is at present in the midst of a period such as always precedes Avataric man≠ifestations. Even awakened men and women are becoming aware of it now. From their darkness they are reaching out for light; in their sorrow they are longing for comfort; from the midst of the strife into which they have found themselves plunged they are praying for peace and deliverance. 
   For the moment, they must be patient. The wave of destruction must rise still higher, must spread still further. But when from the depths of his heart, man desires something more lasting than wealth, something more real than material power, the wave will recede. Then peace will come, joy will 
come, light will come.
   The breaking of my silenceóthe signal for my public manifestationóis not far off. I bring the greatest treasure which it is possible for man to receiveóa treasure which includes all other treasures which will endure for ever, which increases when shared with others. Be ready to receive it! 

