Shri Meher Baba's Tour 

OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA* 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 

    We have reached Talegaon. Shri Meher Baba seems, as usual, to want to avoid formalities and ceremonies, therefore the welcome of the Unique Guest has to be rushed and hushed. While Baba accepts the beautiful gar≠lands, hastily walking through the little garden He lifts them off. The garden is sweet, filled with multicoloured flags waving us welcome. 

Baba enters His room, the usual quarters prepared for Him on the occasions of His rare visits. At once Baba, in His executive manner, calls for the different members of the familyóthe two brothers-in-law, the hostess and also R., her brother from Nasik. Baba's order was that during this visit to Talegaon He would not see crowds of people, but when A. lays before Baba his practical viewpoint, that it would be better to see a few important men and a few of his best clients who were clamouring for Baba 's Darshana and give them a chance to meet his August Guest, Baba leniently smiles stating, "Do as you think best. " This He often does. 

Baba came especially to look into the personal affairs concerning the two brothers who are partners in business. It seems there is much to adjust between them. All these small or huge complications are the usual nightmare in the mind of man that He, the true friend of man, will take on to Him in compassionódissolve and readjust. A perfect luncheon is served at 11 a.m. cooked by the hostess's own hands. On such occasions it is customary when the Master visits His disciples and is a sign of deep respect for the disciple to cook and serve the meal for the Master and His party regardless of their number. It is a demonstration of selflessness and devotion. 

The programme for the afternoon is to motor to the Meher 


Rice Mill, the ancient Fortress of Talegaon which Baba never misses to see, and the Glass Factory The ex≠cursion had its reason. When Baba moves, heaven and hell moves too. The first stop is at Meher Rice Mill, not far from the official residencies including missions, bank, post office, etc. The mill is a huge shack; but to visit the rice mill is not the only reason for Baba 's appearance. There are two black-eyed joyous young men, simple workmen, whom Baba loves very dearly who have also to be looked up from time to time and whom He has to touch and stir to enhance their spiritual courage, look into their eyes and renew His own Life in them. Baba takes in the whole work and leaves behind that unfathomable smile which is so sure and real and good and makes everyone feel sure and real and good. 

We drive on to the Fortress. It has the appearance of an ancient gigantic monument, huge forms towering over other forms in ruin seem the work of some giant of obscure ageófallen trees, jungle-like vegetation, bright shining strange  looking flowers filled with venomous juice, parrot-like birds, all seem to live with and against one another in natural excitement of life. All of a sudden Baba takes a running flight to the far end of this wild jungle-garden. There, like a majestic solid mould in human form He stands still, right in the centre of the red, gold, purple and blue circle of light of the setting sun. He, the Truth Being in existence throwing the divine shadow on its own phenomena, the setting sun in Talegaon. Again we realize how the smallest adventure can become a spiritual romance when with Him we walk through life. We leave feeling light and refreshed. 

    Our next halt is at the Glass Factory. Baba's wish for us to see this little establishment is very definite. We walk in, and it was as if we were passing from process of making; we see light fluid matter which in its process through fire, becomes solid glass; we see a potter taking inarticulate matter, making a form which in itself is art. We see the God-man forming men and expanding souls. The two young work≠men came to take 



Baba's Darshana. They realize that Baba's coming has a meaning, and they live up to the occasion with humility. Also these two humble worshippers, whether conscious or unconscious, belong to the spiritual pioneers of mankind and are destined to participate in the new awakening, whether in Talegaon or New York, in Paris or in Palestine which Baba today governs. 

 We return home. A line of people are already waiting in the garden. Meanwhile the weather, unusual to its season, suddenly changes; it is bitter cold and all the preparations for the evening feast which was to be held in the garden, has to be abandoned. The little living-room has to be quickly transformed into the holy place. To do this is easy, because wherever Baba is, a barren space becomes life, light, pure air. These virtues replace in beauty the external seductions. The music is heard from the garden, while, in still rever≠ence, a few devotees are sitting at Baba's feet. Whether good or bad, self-important or unimportant in social position, we see men, women, children  kneel and bow, making the cross in the order of Christ, or prostrate themselves in other religious manner, in experience of pain or joy, before this Grace in Being who never did but smile. With≠out giving more attention to the post≠master or the banker or the owner of the best shop or the schoolmaster than to any soul in need, He takes in close into His pure heart, all life. Poor or destitute, hungry pilgrims of different castes, for all, He, impartial, pure, is the same sign of divinity for whom these intrepid seekers for Truth cross rivers, valleys and mountains, taking endless roads on foot. It is a rush towards God, soul and happiness. The procession goes on until late. 

We are now all ordered to retire to our rooms. The night is good, quiet and without dreams for all of us but for one who is restless all night outside of Baba's door waiting for Grace, merged in excited anguish of his struggling mind. At the right moment Baba opens the door. It is 4 a. m. and A. 's brother-in-law walks in, quiet, unconditional in acceptance. The wakeful night in front of the Master's 



door has changed him into a new man, he is ready to realize what in the struggle of his mind the day before he was unable to understand. Later, the judge, his wife and all of us are called into the room to witness the 'turning point'. It happens that all come out right, everybody feels sure and is ready to give in. The Peace-maker has recon≠ciled the differences. Each one realizes in his appeased mind that within all differences lies Truth disguised. We realize that the impersonal standpoint begins to be of use to us when in Being we awaken. Leaving behind order, clarity, peace of mind, Baba gives signal to depart. 

We speed on to Bombay. It is the twenty-first of December. The air is nice and cool; quiet and blue is the range of the romantic mountains where Shivaji, the king and great warrior, destroyed the Mohamedan enemies who fought against him. 

In Bombay, Baba is given quarters in the home of a close disciple on Frere Road. Many people are already waiting in the long corridor when Baba, in His real executive manner  at once seeing the need in the hearts of these many, begins to open the eternal well of His great curing Life. While watching the questioning anguish of all these people who call for Grace, it seems as if now mankind 's ordeal has come to some climax in suffering. Again in un-ending compassion and patience, Baba takes on the human struggle and makes light and fluid hope in everyone's heart. 

We are invited for luncheon to the home of C. 's brother. The reception is cheers of merry love. The house is filled with young and old people and children who, in their natural simp≠licity, respond lightly and unhampered to Baba's love. Among the events, during this gathering, we wish to recall a little anecdote. A charming young Parsi mother asks to be received as soon as possible, because she can no longer control her very bad tempered 

'' 

baba. This little two weeks creature, the mother tells, is subject to fits of anger so fierce that it is torture to all who have to witness. The child is as small as a doll unusual in size but almost perfect in its tiny proportionsó to be compared 



to a small edition of Krishna or Ram or any god of some other name. Baba has been informed of the difficult case, but, for good reason, creates suspense...The atmoshere catches His Peace rhythm and in it suddenly the child grows calm. The drama handled with discretion and care by Baba, from a distance, indeed works pure and deep. The child falls fast asleep. After a while Baba calls for the mother and the little one. When He takes the child into His arms, under His look the child's eyes open. The meeting of the soul with the all Soul was sure. The divine dream, as in a fairy story, the child must have experienced. The sign of Grace is on the little face. It is the blissful glow that we in Him worship... Never shall I forget the beauty of the miracle on that child 's face; never have I seen the limitless soul radiate in so small a form. The mother who is well aware of the powerful unseen work of Baba, when going out of the room, carries the child up high like a glorified idol, herself having the unique expression of un≠questioned faith. 

We return to Frere Road. Several of Baba's disciples have arrived from various places, among them R., who left "Meherabad" at the time of Baba 's last trip to Europe. Not wishing to be there during Baba's absence, he accep≠ted the call to teach in a girl's school in Bombay. R. appears to me changed, as though he was going through a new phase of adjustment. in his eyes is the fire of war. I could not follow the excited arguments between him and Baba who, unusually energetic, is hold≠ing a long discussion on His board in vernacular. One sentence in English left a definite picture in my mind. Baba's words were: "A man who cannot cont≠rol action is not a man. " Baba, who always gives us the ultimate outlook, no doubt wanted to enhance within all who were present the impetus to drive on with unflinching courage to the very end, that is aloofness from experience as life of subjective reaction. 

N., from Nasik, is another friend well acquainted with Baba's work. He tells about P., who again is put on a fur≠ther test; such are called the intervals of separation from 



Baba. Baba's message to P., on this par≠ticular occasion is: "I suffer every second of my life untold tortures, you have to share, it is now the last phase, when you see me again you will see me in my true Self." 

 While N. is reporting all this in a low voice, Baba hears it, and, turning round, writes on His board, "Gossip." To Him, the Pure Silent One, all these facts as told by us in our half conscious childish manner must appear as mere gossip: nevertheless Baba smilingly urges us to go on. Furthermore, we hear 

P. has to go on a begging tour, that it will be very hard for him, he will be abused by many, but he will stand it bravely. To us this seems natural. 

On the 23rd of December at 6 a.m. we take the train called "The Flying Ranee" for Navsari. On the train a young man called M., who is to be married to one of the D. girls on the 27th of December, has come to Bombay especially to escort Baba who is to be the guest of the bride 's family. The D. family of Navsari is one of the most influential and prominent  Parsi families in the Baroda State. Since many generations they were great land owners. These estates were gifts to the family for services rendered to the State of the former Maharajah of Gaikwad. The family can he traced back for twenty-eight generations, having lived on that estate. During the evening we are informed of the exceptional pre≠parations for the marriage feast to be held in the home of the bride 's famous uncle, the well-known author in Gujarathi language who, for many months, has been very ill...When Baba moves in the lives of men it is always for some great warning. Baba 's visit to Navsari is to call for a soul. He goes to see the dying man to ordain in him the Divine will, to help him on through the redeeming transgression. 

Later on while discussing among ourselves some subtle subjects, sud≠denly Baba, with the speed of lightning, interrupts the waste in exertion of our minds, making the following statement on Selfless Ser-vice: "God as God alone is not consciously man, and man as man alone is not consciously God. The God-man is consciously both God and man; so the God-man is both Lord and the servant of the universe. Lord, in the state of helping all souls toward reality. Servant, as continuously bearing the burden of all. To serve Him who serves all is serving the universe.



    Selfless service and love are twin divine qualities. Only the one who loves can serve. 

    Serve your Beloved God-man and you are serving your own self in every other self. 

The service He exacts is for your own spiritual benefit; but this service must be spontaneous, willing, whole- hearted, unconditional and not expect≠ing any reward. His service is an ordeal which tries body, mind and spirit; or else where-in would the perfection of serving lie if it were to be easy and at one's convenience. The body suffers, mind is tormented, but the spirit of the selfless server of the Master experi≠ences the bliss of satisfaction. 

    Only the one who has, can renounce. A king giving up everything and be≠coming a beggar, is his true renuncia≠tion; and so only the one who without any question and regardless of con≠sequences serves the God-man, really serves; otherwise it would be just like paid labour." 