Mirabai came from Medta in Rajputana. She is one of the most ardent devotees of Shri Krishna. India has always been fortunate in having her sons and daughters among the ardent devotees of God. They go along the untrodden path towards the Lord, and become guides to those who seek to see and realize him. Their sayings are like the brilliant torches which dispel the darkness in the hearts of the aspirants. Among the women saints Mira is distinguished by her life as well as by her   unique   wonderful poems which to this date lead the way for us. 
The date when Mira was born and the name of her hus­band have been two controver­sial questions. But the scholars are now agreed that she was born in 1560 and that the name of her husband was "Bhoj" and not "Kumbha". 
Mira was the only daughter of Ratansinha, a nobleman of Medta. She lost her mother when she was only a child, and there is little truth in the belief that her mother was res­

ponsible for creating in her the religious attitude of wor­shipping the Lord. After her mother's death she was taken to her grandfather's house. Her grandfather was a great devotee of God, and it was through him that Mira got interested in worshipping Shri Krishna. 
It is said that when Mira was quite young, a saint came to her grandfather's house. He had a very beautiful idol of Shri Krishna. Mira became mad with its sight and requested the saint to give that idol to her. At first the saint was unwilling to part with it, but at last he gave it to her; and from that time Mira began her devotion to Shri Krishna. 
The childhood of Mira is not very eventful, and there were no supernormal signs in her. At the age of thirteen or fourteen she was married to Prince Bhojraj, the eldest son of King Sanga of Chitor. Within ten years after her marriage she lost her father, father-in-law, mother-in-law and lastly her husband; and Mira's marriage was supposed to be the inauspicious cause of all these unhappy incidents. 
After her husband's death, Mira became detached from her home, and she began to spend much of her time in the company of saints. She also got completely lost in her devotion for Shri Krishna. The story about her ardent love and devotion for Shri Krishna got circulated far and wide, and hearing them many saints came to Mira in order to meet her. Mira used to join with these saints in common wor­ship of the Lord. This was against the royal custom, and the members of the royal family tried to dissuade her from it. But Mira had forgot­ten the world and its ways in her ardent devotion for Shri Krishna and was lost in the ecstacy of the company of the Divine Beloved. As all attempts to dissuade Mira from joining with the saints in worshipping the Lord were unsuccessful, the members of the royal family were at a loss to find out ways of compelling her to abide by the discipline of the royal family. 
At this time King Vikra­maditya was the ruler of Chitor, and his treatment to Mira was very wicked. At first he sent a woman named 

Ulabai to Mira to persuade her to give up her worship. But as Ulabai was unsuccessful in her persuasions, she was again sent to Mira with a glass of poison to drink. Mira drank the poison calmly, but, to the surprise of all, she was not at all affected by it. But it is said that instead of Mira the idol of Shri Krishna was found to be affected by the poison and became blue. When the King heard about this, he was surprised; but he did not go back upon his evil intention. He devised another method of get­ting rid of Mira. He sent to Mira a closed basket containing a big poisonous serpent, and instructed the messenger to tell Mira that it contained a shaligram (a symbol of Vishnu). Mira with great joy opened the basket, and to the surprise of the messenger it was found to contain a shaligram and not the serpent. 
After this event it was im­possible for Mira to remain in the kingdom of Vikramaditya. She, therefore, went to sacred places. But, after she left Chitor, calamities began to befall the kingdom of Chitor, and the King began to repent for his attitude to Mira. The people in the kingdom said that the calamities were the result of the treatment given to Mira, and that they would not be mitigated unless the King brought her back to Chitor. The King, therefore, sent a messen­ger to bring her back. It is said that when the King's messenger began to press Mira for coming to Chitor, she approached the idol which she used to worship and disappeared in it. So Mira never came back to Chitor. She entered into samadhi sometime between 1620 and 1630. 
Mira adored Shri Krishna as her Lord and Beloved. In every other human relation there is a feeling of duality, but in the relation of the lover and the Beloved there is no separateness between the two. At one place Mira says: "Come 0 Lord! I am waiting for you. Eating and drinking do not please me, nor can I sleep. I cannot be happy unless you come. Come, my heart has become restless." Elsewhere addressing the Lord, she says: "I am requesting you to speak and still you do not speak. You are cruel. My only desire is that you should speak and none else." 

Mira often expresses herself in figurative and symbolical language which clearly shows that she was going through many occult and supernormal experiences of the spiritual world. At one place she says: "O Mind, let us enjoy the four days of Holi. Without beating the drum we shall hear the Anahata sound, and without using the hands we shall create the sweet music of diverse flutes. Without a tune we shall sing thirty-six ragas, and using the saffron of satisfaction and the syringe of love we shall cover every inch of our body with colours. Gulal (rose coloured powder) is being sprinkled. The clouds have become red and are showering bounteous colours. All the veils of the soul have been cast off and I do not care for what people think." 
At another place she says: "O my Friend, in life and in death, I remember you day and night, and my heart knows that I cannot be happy if I do not see you. I climb higher and higher to see the Path, and I shed tears for the whole night. This world is all false, and the family and relations are also false. With folded 
hands, I request you to listen to what I say. My mind is uncontrollable. It is like an arrogant elephant. O Master! Kindly hold your hand upon my head, and let the mind be curbed with the ankusha (goad). I look at you, and while seeing you I am happy every moment. Beautiful Krishna is the Lord of Mira and her mind has found rest at his feet." 
Equally beautiful is the ex­
pression of faith and love in 
the following famous song of 
Mira: "I am attached to the 
feet of the Master, and I am 
not interested in any other 
thing, since the whole of 
Maya is false like a dream. 
The ocean of the false world 
is all dried up, and I am no 
longer anxious about crossing 
it. O Beautiful Lord Krishna! 
Mira says, ‘My eyes have 
begun to see inwards.'" 
As will be seen from these 
examples, Mira's poetry is an 
expression of unswerving 
faith in God, ardent devotion 
and divine love in all its 
intensity. It also describes 
some interesting occult and 
spiritual experiences. It 
clearly shows that she was a 
very great saint. From her 
very childhood she had 
detachment for the material world, and she was ever ready All over India these poems are even to embrace death for the sung by devotees with great sake of her love for the Lord. rapture. and they have made Mira's poems are mostly songs, Mira an immortal star in the and they are tuned to music. firmament of the world. 

