Shri Upasani Maharaj's Visit To "Khushru 
Quarters" 

BY ADI K. IRANI 
   It was the 16th of February 1936ó Shri Meher Baba's 43rd birthday. As Baba had left Meherabad about a fortnight ago, there was no celebration, nor any visitors expected that would keep me at Meherabad. Hence I went as usual to "Khushru Quarters" in the city (Ahmednagar) to arrange for petty things concerning the Ashram at Meherabad, and also to see my mother Gulmai, who, since Baba's departure from Meherabad, was instructed to stay at home after a very long interval of her stay with Baba. Padri of our Mandali accompanied me. At midday, on finishing my errand, we were about to pull out of the "Khushru Quarters" in car, when suddenly I heard Padri exclaim, "Upasani Maharaj"!        
   Beside himself, there was none occu≠pying the rear seat of the car that curved round mine and shot into the inside of the Sarosh Garage compound and stood in front of our living quarters. 
The stately personality of Maharaj stepped out of the car with a hand slung down as usual in the gunny-cloth apparel (his entire clothing for all sea≠sons of the year) holding it, and the other free for the walking movement. 
   He walked straight into the roomó "My own room" as he said to me later. It was the one Gulmai had requested him before to occupy, whenever he desired to do so, during his visits to Ahmednagaróan apartment set aside exclusively for the purpose of offering prayers and retiring in seclusion, con≠taining, among the photos of Baba and Maharaj, one seat for Upasani Maharaj made out of gunny-cloth pieces and spread out on the floor in the shape of a setteeóa vogue Gulmai introduced in our house since the first visit of Maharaj in 1921 to our old city residence where we lived prior to our shift to the present 

"Khushru Quarters". The original pieces of the rough gunny-cloth, which Maharaj made use of on his first visit, have been treasured by Gulmai very carefully, as well as they could last. Right in front of the Gadi (seat) of Shri Upasani Maharaj, is Shri Meher Baba's wooden settee with his photograph prominently displayed. 
   On entering the room, Maharaj disposed of Mr. Wagh (his secretary) who had accompanied him to Ahmed≠nagar with instructions to look after his affairs in the city and return to "Khushru Quarters" before evening. 
   As is usually the case, Maharaj oc≠cupies his seat immediately on his entry in his room, and allows himself to be saluted by those who happen to be on the spot. I was present, and having first unlaced my shoes, I entered the room, trying to approach Maharaj with soft, noiseless steps. To my amazement, I found him standing on the seat in quiet, meditative way. This very unusual spec≠tacle was the first of its kind I had ever beheld. His hands were folded, and he uttered words of prayer looking strait  into the eyes of Baba's picture placed on the wooden setee. I was overwhelmed with the situation! It was extraordinarily wonderful. He continued muttering prayers for fully five minutes. During these moments of tense surprise remained in speechless awe. I could hardly think what Maharaj felt and saw in Baba!
   "I like this place very much," said he, after he finished the prayers.
   "I like this photograph," pointing to the central picture of Baba. 
   "I like Merwan. He is great. He is unique." 
   "I bow before him. Let me pray in his presence." 
"Please convey my salutations to him." 
   I stood all the while listening and sub≠consciously searching for a satisfactory explanation that would justify such an extraordinary attitude of Maharaj. Could it be Love? Yes. But how could Love of the Master, even for his disciple-in≠chief, express itself in a reverential form? It is the disciple who always owes and shows respect and allegiance to his Guru. Could it be mere praise or devotion 

"Give me a tray and a lamp. I want to perform Arti of Merwan today. You, Gulmai, tell Merwan that I had been here on his birthday, and that I prayed in front of his picture and also performed his Arti."
   Gulmai fetched the ceremonial objects hastily and Maharaj began waving the tray round Baba's picture chanting Mantras. 
   I was dumbfounded! I had seen Mah≠araj eulogize Baba times without number. I had a vivid recollection of the occasion when Maharaj, for the first time in 1921 amidst a gathering of his devotees at Sakori, openly praised Shri Meher Baba, ascribing to him a state of spiritual perfection and knowledge, and concurrently sounding a note of warn-ing to the mandali members of Shri Baba to look upon him as a person to be implicitly followed, obeyed and adhered to, through thick and thin. But never have I seen him (Maharaj) playing the role of a devotee of his disciple, paying respectful homage almost amounting to worship! 
This appreciative devotion of Maharaj, availing himself of the opportunity of Baba's birthday to run down from Sakori to Ahmednagar, especially as it were to give a spon≠taneous outpouring of his sentiments, cannot but be from an intuitive knowledge, that Baba, besides being an entire embodiment of Maharaj's Self, is in addition, the possessor of a potent power, of world-wide service and spiritual domination. 