 MANY names have been given to the Avatar of Nazareth, and as the "Good Shepherd", He is beloved by His devotees in all ages. Jesus Himself declared:— 
“My sheep hear my voice and they follow Me.” 
In His Parable of the Good Shepherd, who left the ninety and nine, safely in the fold to seek and to save the one that had stayed and was lost, we can see the loving Master facing all the perils which separate ''His Beloved Self'' in the wilderness from Him, until He has found the lost one and brought it back in triumph. 
Hebrew Prophet Isaiah declared concerning the Messiah of the Jews:— 
“He shall feed His flock like a shepherd, He shall gather the lambs with His arms and carry them in His bosom, and shall 
gently lead those that are with young.” 
In one of the best known Psalms, familiar to all in the West to whom the Bible is an open book, King David sang: "The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall 
not want, He maketh me to lie down in green pastures, He leadeth me besides the still waters, He restoreth my Soul.... " 
As a lad, David had kept his father's sheep, and was so em­ployed when he became anointed by the Prophet Samuel as future King. Both Krishna and Hermes were shepherds and the respective descriptions of each in the Vishnu Puranas and Homeric Hymns show other points of similarity between them. It was the voice of the Shepherd of Man who coun­selled Hermes:— "Hold in thy mind all that thou 

wouldst know, and I will teach 
thee .... I am 'Man-shepherd' mind of all 
Masterhood, I know what thou 
desirest and am with thee 
everywhere." 
Shri Baba declared similarly at Nasik to his Western disciples gathered there in 1937:— 
"For nearly twelve years, no word has passed my lips. Yet I am never silent. I speak eternally. The voice that is heard deep within the soul is my voice, the voice of inspiration, of intuition and guidance. Through those who are receptive to this voice, I speak." 
The Greek Hermes also was enlightened from within by the "Divine Pymander" for whom the English equivalent is "The Shepherd of Man". He experienced God as the inner Light, the life that consists in union between that which sees and hears within Himself, and the Divine Mind (Father-God) who are both not separate one from the other.1 
The Shepherd gazed for long into the eyes of Hermes, and He became further awakened by the Master's spiritual force, so that He trembled to look at Him. The process of parting the tawajjuh* (concentration of the spiritual force) of a Master, Shri Baba explained: ''It is a purely spiritual operation, which is helpful in arousing the latent spark of Divinity in man." 
We read in the Christian Gospels also, that Jesus turned and looked on Peter, who went out and wept bitterly, not signs of ordinary grief, but the innermost stirrings of the Soul, kindled by the Master Himself in His chief Apostle. 
Hermes became united with that Divine Mind (Father-God) and experienced the love that pours forth throughout the cosmos from Him. He saw it energising the inner formative sphere, downward into the realm of nature, wherein man is mortal because of body, but immortal because of the essential man, co-equal with that same Father-Mind that brought him forth. Thus he attained a settled state in union with the Divine, and himself he comes "Shepherd of Man"; Hermes’ Master said to him: 
'' If then thou learnest, thou art thyself of life and light, that thou only happenest to be out of them, thou shalt return again to life. Why shouldst thou then delay? Must it not be thou hast all received, that thou shouldst to the worthy point the way, in order that thro' thee the race of mortal kind, may by (thy) God be saved."1 

Hermes thereupon, filled with power and wisdom from "Man Shepherd " became a leader of the race towards home .... teaching the word."1 Some who heard met him with tests, but others "received of the deathless waters they were given to drink," and "Hermes, with every hope fulfilled, more than rejoiced, for body's sleep became the Soul's awakening, and utterance of his word (Logos). The beginning of good things, and he returned thanks whose name naught but the silence can express."1 
Hermes also imparted special teaching to certain close disciples to whom are addressed some of the chapters of his words which have survived. In Book 7  we may read: "This Wisdom is to be under­stood in silence; it is sown of the Will of God .... It is not taught, but it is by God when He pleaseth, brought to remembrance."2 One is reminded here of Shri Baba's words: "I have come not to teach but to awaken.'' 
Hermes also indicates how he imparts the higher consciousness to his beloved disciple: "These things that I see and contemplate, I infuse into thee. Learn this of me, above all other virtues, entertain silence."2 Shri Baba also stated: (Letter from Mysore, 6-3-36) "Things that are real are always given and received in silence." 
Much of the inner teachings imparted to the aspirant after spiritual experience was given in those ancient days, in the Greek temples whose ruins are still the marvel for all to see, used for ceremonial and symbolic instruc­tion and silence was enjoined upon those who took part in the mysteries of religion; some traces have since been given to the world; through the research of anti­quarians and scholars, but it needs the word of the Master to make Truth available for the people as a whole, and for his life in the flesh to appear before the eyes of men that they may see the Reality in their midst. Hermes declared to his generation:— "The greatest evil in man is not to 

know God. Wherefore ye ignorant men seek one who may lead you by the hand, and conduct you to the door of Truth and Knowledge, where the Pure Light is that is pure from darkness."2 Hermes also described man's 
true nature:— 
“Man who hath mind in himself, learneth to know that he himself is deathless, that the cause of death is Love, and Love is all. He who thus hath learned to know himself, reaches that good which transcends abundance, but he that through a love that leads astray, expends his love upon the body, stays in darkness wandering, through his senses suffering things of death." The highest knowledge of God, 
wherein He may be experienced in full consciousness, Shri Baba has declared to be in man himself, and we must strive to see Him in all men of the "God-mad". He stated: "For all are loveable, and in them all I see myself." Those who are nearest to Him, he addresses in his letters as "My beloved selves", and these are no figures of speech, but the great reality that we are all one in Him, and He in us, as Jesus also declared in His own day. Baba wrote of the Sadgurus, who guide the destinies of humanity: ''They know themselves as God in everything, and are therefore able to help everything spiritually." 
Hermes declared to Tat, his spiritual son, that "God is not manifest, and yet most manifest Being Father of all, for the Lord appeareth through the whole world. But if that which is in thee be not known or apparent to thee, how shall He in thee be seen? For only the understanding sees that which is not manifest or apparent." Jesus said, "If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness." 
In few words Hermes shows the relationship between man, God the Creator and the One who is behind and within all: 
"Therfore must we be bold to say that an earthly man is a mortal God and that the heavenly God is an immortal man. Wherefore by these two are all things goverened, the world and man, but they and all things else of that which is “One”. 2 

Hermes is often depicted as a shepherd with a lamb or ram in his arm or over his shoulder, and such statues of the Greek Hermes were adopted, in the earliest Christian art, to represent Jesus; one art authority is of opinion that there were probably no other statues of Jesus, the Christ, than those of the Hermes type before the age of Constantine. The Christis also depicted as the Good Shepherd of that type, on a Christian lamp and gem of the third century, which includes that these symbols associated with Mithras, shows how the work of the Avatar is perpetuated in symbols from age to age. 
The fragments that remain of the life of Hermes and his teachings are insufficient to assign a place in time within the synthesis of Avataric manifestation. By some, however, he has been identified with "Thoth" of Egypt, "The Interpreter, or Thrice Greatest Intelligencer" and also with Mercurious of the Romans. The gift of communicating knowledge to men in writing has also been ascribed to Hermes, but as the Shepherd of the Divine under­standing within the heart that speaks in silence, He is most widely recognized. The title "Shepherd'' has been preserved in historic times by the hermetic colonies (who settled in Mesopotamia in about the tenth century) for their leader. 
To-day as in the days of Hermes, the greatest problem is to experience God within, in full consciousness, which is God-realization. Quoting again from a letter from Shri Baba written from Mysore three years ago when in seclusion there:— 
"Problems each individual has, petty problems that have nothing but a passing influence or significance. But the greatest of all problems—the solution of this 'struggle of existences', this 'riddle of life', the problem of 'Self­realization' which includes all the petty problems of the world and humanity put together, remains unsolved for ages, until Perfect Master takes up that mission and helps the suffering humanity, struggling in the meshes of Maya, to be out of it." 

How the words of one Master illumine another great spiritual soul can be seen by comparing the foregoing with Hermes' inspired utterance:— 
"If therefore thou wilt not equal thyself to God, thou canst not understand God, for the like is intelligible by the like." 
Jesus said to His disciples also:— 
"Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father in Heaven is perfect." 
Hermes, like all Masters, is most practical. He adds: 
"But to be able to know and to will and to hope is the straight way and Divine Way, proper to the good. And it will everywhere meet thee, and everywhere be seen of thee, plain and easy when thou dost not expect or look for it. It will meet thee, waking, sleeping, sailing, travelling, by night, by day, when thou speakest and when thou keepest silence. For there is nothing which is not in the image of God." 
Shri Baba has explained how his activities during his travels in the East and in the West, as well as his interior work for humanity while in seclusion, and the gathering of his "circle" of closest  disciples, all enable him to make the outer contact with the world as it is now in this age. Those who point with scorn to the frailties of the closest disciples of Jesus, as a reflection upon his Divine Work cannot understand that such human traits permeate humanity as a whole, and His work for those whose love enables them to stand the tests of inner purification, permeates through them in ever-widening circles to different types of the mass of people, so that none are over-looked but all receive according to their measure of response. 
It is the greatest wonder to observe Shri Baba's patience, wisdom and never-failing Love with those who are closest to him. The love of the Gopis for Krishna, which Vivekananda extolled as the highest type of "Love for Love's sake", is rekindled first in their hearts by the Master’s dealings with them. 
There is also Shri Baba’s work with his agents in the unseen and in human incarnation 

who through him, guide the destinies of mankind, as well as his work with the Saints and others advanced upon the spiritual Path, all of whom are channels through which the souls of men receivc the "Heavenly Manna". In conjunction with his ceaseless universal work, he has the daily routine of the ever-growing circle of devotees whom he guides with infinite Love and unfailing tenderness and knowledge of their individual needs, and the maintenance of contacts with disciples all over the world, as well as with all the branches of work in India he has initiated would overwhelm an ordinary man. 
Especially with the despised and down-trodden, the weak and suffering, is this lover of mankind concerned, as many can witness, but he has come to the rich, also, to set his seal upon true culture as a stepping stone to a life divinely lived with his own unexampled activity amidst detachment and Love unsullied by any ego and displayed in his own life in perfect harmony. 
Small wonder then that for this "Shepherd of Man" there are hearts already aflame, as he is gathering up the mighty works of his predecessors, that all may eventually hear the Voice of the great Shepherd of all. 

