
Love for the Sadguru or Perfect Master is particularly important, 
because it invites contact with the Sadguru. Through such contact 

the aspirant receives from the Sadguru impressions which have the special potency of undoing other past impressions, and thus completely transforming the tenor of his life. The recipient of the impressions may entirely give up old habits of life and 
ways of thought. It changes and elevates the tone of the most depraved life. A person might have been leading a life of wreckless dissipation without ever thinking of anything other than the fulfilment of mundane desires. He might be caught up in the thirst of possession and power, and may have no ideal other than that of acquiring and hoarding money and becom­
• 
ing merry. But even such a person who cannot, by any stretch of imagination, think of freedom from earthly fetters may find that the sanskaras which he catches from his contact with the Sadguru are potent enough to drop for ever a curtain on his old manner of thought and existence, and open for him entirely new vistas of a higher and freer life. The impressions received from the Sadguru might be equally beneficial to an intellectual and cultured person whose vision is nevertheless circumscribed, whose imagination can at best appreciate the beauty of art and literature, and whose altruism cannot transgress the limits of his neighbourhood or the boundaries of his country. Such a person would, on receiving the impressions from a Sadguru, be lifted to still higher modes of life. 
The Sadguru can raise the aspirant from the ordinary intellectual level of consciousness to the level of 
consciousness where there is 
inspiration and intuition, and then 
onwards to the level of insight and 
illumination which culminates in 
his merging into the infinite. This 
rising of the aspirant corresponds to his progress from the mundane sphere to the subtle sphere, from the subtle sphere to the mental sphere, and finally from the mental sphere to the state of Freedom. The last step implies complete wiping out of all sanskaras—natural or non-natural—positive or negative. To take the analogy   of the string which 
is wound round a stick, this process of the wiping out of sanskaras consists of the cutting of the string by means of a pair of scissors. The erasing of all sanskaras which is implied in the final release of consciousness from all illusion and bondage can never be achieved except through the grace of a Sadguru. 
But such active intervention by the Sadguru presupposes unrestrained relationship between the aspirant and the 
Sadguru, and such unrestrained rela­
tionship can be established only when 
the aspirant succeeds in complete 
self-surrender to the Sadguru. Self-surrender implies obedience of all the orders of the Master. When all your desires and actions are guided by him and are the result of your obeying his orders, he becomes directly responsible for them. Thus when self-surrender is thorough, the responsibility for your release from sanskaras is devolved upon the Master, and under this new condition the Master annihilates all your sanskaras in no time.
 Obedience to the Master as implied in full self-surrender is of two kinds: (1) intellectual and (2) literal. Of these two 
preliminary to literal obedience which 
kinds  of  obedience  intellectual  
obedience INTELLECTUAL  comes  first,  and  is  a  
OBEDIENCE  

is more fruitful. When you are intellectually convinced about the greatness and perfection of the Master, you have love and respect for him, but are unable to follow his orders literally. Reason being the basis of your conviction, you find it difficult to divorce it from your understanding of the Master and his orders. And as the two are inextricably intertwined with each other, your reasoned faith holds you within the limits of intelligible obedience. This phase of the pupil is left undisturbed by the Master, and all the pills of obedience offered by him are intellectualised in order to suit his taste and calibre. 
Through intellectual obedience of the Master you can annihilate all your sanskaras, provided you are sincere in your logical interpretation of his orders and in their execution. But the result comes much quicker if your obedience is literal. Literal obedience is the effect of the rock-like faith 
and deep love which the Master inspires in the pupil through his human appeal. The overflowing radiance of the halo of the Master and the effulgence of purity and compassion are mainly responsible for creating in the pupil an unswerving faith which prepares him to follow the orders of the Master implicitly irrespective of their satisfying his critical spirit. Such literal obedience is not even bound by the requirement that the real significance of the orders should be within the intellectual comprehension of the pupil, and it is the best type of obedience which yon can aspire for. Through such implicit and unquestioning obedience all the crooked knots of your desires and sanskaras are set straight; and it is through such obedience that a deep link is 
 THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS 
5 
created between the Master and the pupil, with the result that there is an unhindered and perennial flow of spiritual wisdom and power into the pupil. At this stage the pupil becomes the spiritual son of the Master; and in due time, he is freed from all individualistic and sanskaric ties, and he himself becomes a Master. 
The Sadguru or a Perfect Master has a position and power which is unique. There are many souls in the world who are more or less advanced on the spiritual Path, but 
there are few who have crossed all the 
THE ROLE OF 
six stages of the internal spheres of 
THE SADGURU 
consciousness and become one with the Infinite Source of Existence, Knowledge and Bliss. The Sadguru has not only experienced the different planes of consciousness, but he actually permeates the very being of all souls because of his having become one with the Infinite. He is the pivot of universal activity. In a sense, to him are due all your thoughts and actions, your joys and sorrows, your frets and fumes, your strength and weaknesses, your possessions and surrenderance, and your love and longing. He not only pervades all existence but is consciously conversant with the cosmic law of cause and effect and the complex working of the sanskaras of the individual souls. The causes of individual happiness or misery, vices or virtues are as much known to him as the causes of cosmic changes and upheavals. Every being is an open book for the  infinite searchlight of his 
omnipresent consciousness. He is, because of his union with the Infinite, endowed with unlimited power, and can, in the twinkling of an eye, annihilate all the sanskaras of the soul, and liberate it from all entanglements and bondage.
