WHAT is joy and what is suffering? Where is the end of one and the beginning of the other? Where is joy without suffering and light without shadow? Do men know the fulness of joy untouched by reactions? 
All living beings seek joy; it is in the nature of things to seek it consciously and unconsciously, every flower and tree stretches its petals and branches to the sun. 
In the contrasts of human experiences, real beauty stands out and the meaning of things becomes outlined. When we shake off the dust from our feet and look into the workings of life from the aloof top of objectivity and dispassion—all life appears in a different perspective; deep wisdom shines through all contradictions of duality and life's facets glitter in their infinite fascinations—be it joy or sorrow. The unrolling film of contrasts displays its colour, throws light against dark and makes it alive with joy and pain of beauty and ugliness—all serving the One infinite game of concealed meaning. The riddle and mystery of this life-game holds its key in wisdom. This life-drama tends to entice men into longing for its divination and so Truth wins souls, catching them on the bait of hunger for Reality and stability of joy. It is bound to become the very aim, the dream of dreams, the One most desired Goal, being not available on the plane of duality, this Ideal calls for greater efforts and compels man into new inquiries. It requires the whole of man’s striving—the very out­growing from past attitudes and pleasures—it holds their hearts as the highest bid of all existence. Life has been swinging the pendulum from one extreme to the other and it seeks to remain in the point beyond swinging; it seeks that stillness which is the highest activation between and beyond the extremes. 
Life is like waves that roll on 

the surface of hidden depths, each wave having its crest-top, their summits are raised to their heights as their curves are sinking downwards. And so it is with all things: the highest mountain tops have the lowest valleys and abysses; the greatest storms are followed by brightest sunlight; the strongest light throws its darkest shadow— inseparable one from another! 
Each moment of joy has its swing downward. The mystic poet Khalil Gibran says: "Your joy is your sorrow unmasked and self­same well from which your laughter rises was oftentimes filled with your tears. And how else can it be? The deeper the sorrow carves into your being the more joy you can contain." 
It is only when the game of life is played to the point of its extreme joy and extreme suffering, when the illusion of false enchantments had disclosed its delusion, when carvings of senses have shown their futility and human ambitions become defeated being out of proportion with means to achieve, when men altogether have realized their insufficiency and capacity to demonstrate the real happy life— that life really begins as a conscious aim to fulfil. All the conflicting degrees of being with its selfish suffering and joy form a chorus of dissonances until the fire of pain and dissatisfaction blazes up the heart in longing for unison and harmony of Real Happiness. 
Yet the very suffering in conflict and strife, the pain of reaction and disappointment becomes the very impulse of new life, a natural drive for an expiation and annihilation of ignorance. 
All the experience grows into a natural momentum for the destruction of egoism and of surrendering of desires, habits, inclinations, attachments to make room for the advents of the new man in place of the old, of the new joy in compensation for self-denial. One has nothing more to wish of this world, nothing of the past is hidden as the bargain has ceased; one comes then to the last surrender to the Master in non-seeking, not even the very joy of liberation. Having renounced the alloyed ephemeral joys one refuses to be deceived by pseudo-enjoyments; engaged firmly on the Path one does not linger in wasting life's swift moments on vain rehearsals and repetitions of past deceptions. And on the higher stage, non-self-conscious, freed from self-seeking, selfless and pure one longs to be of service to the Master. This impersonal disentangled existence is light and quick in adjusting all life's situations and needs. "It becomes a free flow of the One creative Will in all", as Baba says. False intoxicants of life can have no more attraction and taste to those who had even a glimpse, even the very beginning of that inner experience of selflessness with its purity and serene detach­ment. 

But what for samadhis, what for isolation from life, of "closing doors and holding breath"! What about it indeed when one seeks nothing for the self having found the joy of serving the Perfect One? To be His instrument and to respond to Him freely without tension and false restraint of the ego, in pure joy of life in Him and for Him is the real Happiness—pure and guileless. 
Would one not open the wings for the flight in higher regions of the Self and dare to try the new ways of selflessness? Would one not willingly give up the fleeting joys which bind and turn their reverse side often leading to inseparable downfalls and delays? 
Why suffer without hope of victory? Why suffer to suffer more and to find that one is nowhere? Such life would be nothing but unconscious expiation of ignorance without hope of conscious expia­tion of enlightenment. Would one choose despair and final failure, be in helplessness and self-delusion performing the slow suicide of Self instead of the Path of the hopeful and brave? Though they have to suffer, their suffering is blessed with a firm love of the Ideal and the joy of attainment of permanent happiness. 
Meher Baba said: "Suffering is good which ends suffering. Suffering is absolutely necessary on the Path." 
Suffering is unavoidably immi­nent and has to be accepted. Nothing, nothing of this world on its dual plane is a safeguard from suffering. The greatest epicureans, the most powerful in life, men of greatest fortunes, positions, good-luck, those who have made a very cult of themselves and their welfare have been subject 

to pain, could not avoid suffering and catastrophies. There is no outward panacea from suffering. It comes anyhow, it may come unexpectedly as a sudden outer shock or an inner blow. It may be broken health, it may be a disappointment, it may be an outward disaster—it is anyhow beyond the control of man. The material existence is bound to deterioration and change and is inevitably only a passing phase. "Tout passe, tout casse, tout lasse," says a French poet. The very nature of things, the very fact of suffering brings about resignation  and acceptance; through its agony it becomes the very eye-opener of something greater than human conception, something more real than deceiving securities, something transcending the plane of reason and the standpoint of the narrow personal ' I '. In its utter seeming irrationality it revolts and baffles the reason, yet at the same time invincibly compels to capitulate and to recognize the supreme power beyond the human, the supreme Law ruling the course of life. The supreme Will of transmutation is inscribed in all creation as a driving force toward the realization of this Will of the Infinite behind the visible, of Spirit behind matter, of nothing­ness of man before the Reality of the Divine state of being. 
The conquering moment, the turning point in suffering is the very compelling force in it that curbs one to surrender and to giving in. The very incapacity otherwise to find the way out of it, the very fact of suffering rises the momentum of renunciation of that very claim of the ego which caused pain. Suffering becomes released of its sting and agony as soon as one yields the resistance and bitterness as suffering holds its own remedy by hitting the very cause of the disturbance—which is the ego. That which was nothing but a curse and darkness, becomes a blessing revealing its hidden good, making the longing for the Light more irresistible and sure. 
So suffering being a product of imperfection is a medium of perfection. Suffering is the pain of unfulfilled perfection and is an awakener from slumber and stagnation, from error and degradation. 
It is a destructive pain when it is for perpetration of the ego; it is constructive as a stimulant 

to pick up in favour of the spiritual call of harmony with the Divine Law. Suffering can be this or that, it depends what end it is seeking and what is its source. Sinking into depression and indulging in re­trospection adds pain and is a hindrance on the Spiritual Path; when it is a loss of spiritual mem­ory, is a poison; and when it is a natural unavoidable human tribute to the process of rebirth, it is a blessing and a constructive part of the great game. 
Suffering that was overcome gives its very fire to new joy, purified and intensified in this very burning of pain. Suffering is joy reversed. It is the negative pole of the very same feeling which serves joy in positive strong moments of creativeness. Suffering is a mis­used and missed momentum of spiritual opportunity, it is a failure to rejoice by taking the upper flight into an attitude of non-reaction, non-resistance within and its unbroken continuity in conscious­ness; one could rise above suffering with its dispersing of energy into personal false reactions. Suffering becomes the whip of the ego seeking its self-affirmation. 
Suffering carries its own defeat. 
Its chastisement is its own verdict. Yet the outlet is always there as long as it reminds of the lost beauty and harmony of serenity. A step backward may therefore lead to a greater forward impetus and serve as a preparation for a new leap ahead. The raised pitch of feeling then increases the power of effort and turns it into release of Unity and Joy. 
Real Joy is obedience to the call of God as a spontaneous response. Joy is an open state in tune with creativeness—it is a free flow of Universal Joy. Real Joy results out of gathering of lesser unused joys into Oneness of One Joy. It is a release of forces in glorification of victory and obedience to the spiritual Law of Being. 
The joys of the selfish are short-lived and carried away by the course of things. The hearts of the selfish are like dried pools; they tarry in isolation from the source. Real joy is the state of the pure and the selfless in them the pure Love becomes the source of Joy unalloyed. 
Once Meher Baba said: "God would never let suffering befall on humanity if it would not be for its highest spiritual 

good." Acceptance and willing resignation to the unseen Will behind it all however painful and injust it may seem reveals the True justice of things—"the justice in injustice"; it moves one to transcend the ego, the limitations of the ' I ', it breaks the resistance of inertia of selfish existence in the compelling process of overcoming. It marks the birth of the spirit. Suffering in a warning, is a signal of danger, of remembrance which can be used constructively. It calls for emergency vigilance against dropping into the negative self-indulgence of brooding suffering, of self-pity and unhealthy negative remembrance of sorrow. Such self-imposed suffering unneces­sarily shuts the light away and makes one a victim of chronical negativeness and ignorance. The antidote of suffering is rational discrimination and keeping the channel of intuitive understanding open and steady. Such cons­tructive attitude makes the best use of creativeness of the higher impulse toward the dominion of the higher True Self. The Master uses that impulse ever purifying it and increasing its outcome in selflessness. 
The Master always expects His real followers to meet the trials with courage, in high spirit of cheerfulness. The Self-imposed unnecessary suffering He calls "madness". What is a source of great suffering to the spiritually unconscious and untrained person is no problem at all to a spiritually awakened soul. Nothing can be a loss even in its consequent sorrow when beforehand one has renounced the very desire of things of the world and is becoming mentally detached. But while the ego persists and its roots are not completely extracted it has to suffer in the process of eradica­tion and transmutation. That pain is in the very nature of growing and out growing. That suffering is a propelling power which moves the being on and on, out of errors and lacks, out of unfitness and imperfection, into the new ways of progressive changes and ultimate sublimations and outlets in higher state of being . 
It is the feeling which moves one to seek the corrective adjustments and so stimulates the growth of conscious life seeking its expression in fulfilment of the intrinsic Will of the Spirit. It strengthens the 

intuitive preferences and con­siderations of enlightened atti­tudes against ignorance; it en­hances the spiritual discernment and inner grasp against the false, crude and deceptive experiences of selfish and phenomenal existence which touches and reaches only to the material outward surface of life in its naive primitive stage of the con­crete appearance. In the hands of the Perfect Master the human suffering becomes a storehouse of new creative forces, which break the old forms and inner bondages. 
He directs those forces inward and upward and turns the eyes of the seekers away from the outer in their search of Reality. 
How could perfect happiness and joy be possible in the state to which human beings have come? From that angle suffering is the essential way to happiness. It does not seem any longer that cruel injustice which takes the cherished human dreams and illusions away! On the contrary, for that very reason it becomes a blessing and a cure as an anti­dote for false intoxications. Suffering is a turning of the heart away from lethargy of selfish blindness. 
Suffering is a warning signal compelling one to seek the Truth; it arouses a natural incentive for spiritual awakening. Suffering is the prelude to real awakening of Love, when one is brought in contact with the Perfect Master. 
"As much as life is the messing of things (creating, entangling and conflicting sanskaras) so much the dawn of spirituality brings the unmessing of things", says Baba. Suffering puts an end to "messing of things" when one is guided by the Master. 
Khalil Gibran beautifully says in his poem:— 
Your pain is the breaking of the shell 
that encloses your understanding. Even as the stone of fruit must break That its heart may stand in the sun So must you know pain. And could you keep your heart in 
wonder at the daily miracles of your life? Your pain would not seem less wondrous than your joy. 
And you would accept the seasons of your heart even as you have always accepted the seasons that pass over your fields. 

And you would watch with serenity 
through the winters of your grief. 
Much of pain is self-chosen. It is the 

bitter poison by which the physician 
within you heals your sick self. Therefore trust the physician and 
drink his remedy in silence and 
tranquillity. 
The Real Physician—Meher Baba—lifts the tone of the heart of the seeker and uses the flight of new joy for His work within the seeker. Then the happy moods are no more for feeding the cravings of self-enjoyment, but for launching the wings of the soul that takes to pure soaring in the heights of selflessness! Yet the Master will also use the sorrowful moments when they can serve to clear the vision and arouse a new pure grasp in spiritual conscious­ness—the only immunity to pain Gradually the personal joys and sorrows altogether lose their former importance. Being brought to a higher point by the Master one naturally will shrink from the old sell and cease to react in personal sense; even the subtle reactions of inner experiences mixed with subtle selfish impurities will only leave a sort of unpleasant after­taste and make one seek the purity of selflessness as the only way to the Pure distilled Joy of the Soul. Even a glimpse of such experience gives inspiration and strength to refuse and pass over the unspiritual subtle reactions intent with the dross of self-satisfaction. One has well learned that all selfish human joys are fatally doomed to decrease in tone, owing to the reverse swing of reactions. In the light of real spiritual understanding one strives to abstain. from using the energies of inner experiences on emotional reactions and personal satisfac­tions or dissatisfactions. The misuse and waste of pure life's momentum weakens the accum­ulated impetus of spiritual effort and mixes up the purified state of consciousness. Instead of burning up the fuses on strong reactions of anger and excitement, one gradually learns to regulate and control the balanced rhythm of the heart. Its spared inner forces will rise to the rhythm of the Life-source itself when the deeper contact with the Grace of Meher Baba will open the perennial Well of Life-Joy in perpetual outflow. But the little channels of forces and smaller currents 

of "waters" of emotion must be first well in hand of the Master and under control of the aspirant to prevent the breaking of the dam and of the mixing with mud and all impurities, so they will not lose their way nor overrun the marked new tracks which hold them intact. 
To know how to abstain from the using of our life-energies in selfish reactions is a real spiritual art on the Path of Perfection. Only in the pure state, washed thoroughly from all clingings of the self, one may be able to contain the glimpses of that beauty of the Master which He actually is. But to see it, to be One with Him as He is, that is the Supreme Grace of the Master for those who have come to the utmost purity of selflessness. The perpetual life-joy is the Grace poured by Him into those who become empty of themselves and still within, in complete response to the Master; who made pure and selfless, have dropped their ego. 
It is not for those who cling to their will and self-experience; it is not for those who persist in seeking samadhis before they have washed their hearts with the blood of purifying suffering and service. It is not for whose ambition leads them to think that they know better and in their pride miss the real opportunity. 
It is not for those who choose to stagnate in the inertia of their old selves. But it is for those who realize the necessity of sacrifice and who feel the boredom of the self. It is for those who moved by greatness of Pure Truth and selflessness of the Perfect One can become so enflamed by the example of the Living Ideal as to have the necessary pitch which will carry them on. It takes all the momentum of the dynamic swing of evolution, all of the creative­ness in ever renewing and sustaining effort in being; it requires all the flame, inspiration, trust and love which the human being can give. It is only when one lets the ego go and yields one’s spiritual destiny into the hands of the Master in unconditional surrender and obedience that the ultimate unconditional happiness may be attained. 

