

Parallels Between the Teachings 
of 
Lord Buddha and Shri Baba 

Part II 
BY DR. C.D. DESHMUKH, M.A., Ph. D. 
THE essence of Lord Buddha's Teaching is that in order to remove suffering from life we must eradicate the cause of suffering. And the universal cause of suffering, he declares, is Jammi Tanha, i.e., wretched craving. And this truth he declares on the sole authority of Reason. It does not derive its validity from any superstitious or unintelligible quarters. Lord Buddha is a thorough-going Rationalist. In fact he was accused by his enemies as being nothing more than a Rationalist. Once Sariputta told the Holy One that Sunakkhatta, the Licchavi prince was, out of desire to defame him, proclaiming to all that his Teaching was not based on any superior insight, ìthe pith of it all being that if only a man thinks and ponders enough, he will arrive at the ending of suffering.î 
To this charge, the answer of the Enlightened One was "Sariputta, a commendation of the Accom≠plished One it is, when any one proclaims that 'the pith of the doctrine preached by ascetic Gotama is this, that if only a man will think and ponder sufficiently, he will be led to the final ending of suffering'." We thus see that he was a thorough-going Rationalist and did not want to be anything else. 
Shri Meher Baba also repeat≠edly points out that craving is necessarily the cause of suffering. And this conclusion is arrived at by a searching psychological analysis of the experience of suffering. He says, ''It is your right to be happy and yet you create your own unhappiness by wanting things. Wanting is the source of perpetual restlessness. If you do not get the thing you 

wanted, you are disappointed. And if you get it, you want more and more of it and become unhappy. Say, I do not want anything, and be happy."* 
With the arising of craving in the human mind there arises in it a restlessness, a sense of emptiness, a void; and this in itself is a state of suffering. And as a consequence of the arising of craving there also arise fear, anxiety, worry, etc., which complicate and intensify the experience of suffering. Further, after the arising of craving in consciousness it can only end in one of the following two ways. (i) It might be frustrated or (ii) it might be fulfilled. Of these two alternatives, frustrated craving al≠ways leads to the experience of suffering. And even the second alternative of fulfilled craving more often than not leads to suffering because the object of craving often proves in attainment much less than what it was in anticipation. In this case the experience of disappointment in attainment often leads to the arising of another craving for some other 
object and thus to a fresh chain of suffering. 
Thus craving leads to another craving ad infinitum and sustains an unending chain of sufferings unless the chain is broken at some point by the deliberate eradication of craving. But most people refrain from taking this step dictated by reason because their mind is caught up in the delusion or wrong belief that craving may lead to pleasure. This delusion is sustained by the fact that occasionally the second alter≠native of fulfilled craving does lead to a certain amount of pleasure or a sense of relief and the mind ignores the fact that the pleasure or relief is only intermittent and transitory. It is momentary, unstable and insecure, and in itself it does not bring to a man any lasting or real satis≠faction. But it brings about a pseudo-fulfilment of life and merely serves as bait for enter≠taining craving. And the mind is deluded by these baits because it is moved by craving. Thus craving leads to delusion and delusion in its turn leads to craving. And a man is 

caught up in this vicious circle with the result that there is no end to his suffering. 
The clear perception that craving must in the long run and on the whole lead to suffering and nothing else, does not readily arise in deluded minds because when they have any experience of suffering they do not attempt to understand its real cause which is craving. But instead of facing the experience of suffering and discovering its root cause they seek an escape from that suffering by allowing their minds to be caught up in some other fresh craving. The deluded mind deceives itself by the unconscious belief that if this craving does not lead to happiness some other craving will. But a person who has begun to understand experience by submitting it to the critical application of reason frees himself from delusion and clearly sees that craving is always the cause of suffering. And having seen this truth about the cause of suffering he gradually emancipates himself from the chains of craving until he attains final Peace. This, therefore, is the exhortation of Lord Buddha: "Lighten, O disciples, this 
heavy ship. When it is emptied then will it bear you easily away. When ye are free from hates and lusts, then shall ye fare swiftly towards Nibbana." 
There is no security in the world of changing forms as long as the mind is clinging to them. Only through the utter ending of craving can one attain Supreme Security. We have seen that according to both the Seers the cause of the suffering of the individual is craving. And they both declare that we have to look to that very cause in order to account for social disharmony. It is because of craving that an individual or group of individuals try to dominate another indivi≠dual or group of individuals. We thus have private and organised exploitation. Then again, obstructed or frustrated craving leads to hate and anger and these in their turn lead to conflicts, wars, and mutual destruction. The ending of craving will therefore also put an end to social chaos. 
The problem of securing social harmony is of course more urgent than the problem of ending craving in the minds of the individual. And it can not be ignored until every 

individual attains Nibbana. Lord Buddha perceived this and therefore gave to his disciples an uncompromising commandment to renounce hatred under all circumstances. Lord Buddha was an uncompromising Pacifist and exposed the fallacy of the belief that hatred ean be conquered through hatred. This erroneous belief constitutes the unconscious philosophy of those modern nations who believe in armaments. The principal tenet of this philosophy is as follows: 'In order to avoid war, be prepared for war.' But Lord Buddha clearly saw that preparation for war can never be preparation for peace. He declares:ó 
Na hi verena verani sammatidha kadachana 
Averena cha sammati esha dhammo sanatano. "Never can hatred be vanquished through hatred, but only through non-hatred; this is the eternal law." He does not allow any exception to his commandment for renouncing hate. He even goes further and requires that the disciples shall instead fill their minds with thoughts of positive love even to≠wards those who do harm to them. 
We thus find Lord Buddha giving the following injunction in the Parable of the Saw: ''Ye disciples, even if highway robbers with a two-handed saw should take and dismember you Iimb by limb, whoso grew darkened in mind thereby would not be fulfilling my injunctions. Even then, disciples, thus must you school yourselves; 'Unsullied shall our minds remain, neither shall evil word escape our lips. Kind and compassionate ever, we will abide loving of heart nor harbour secret hate. And those robbers will we permeate with stream of loving thought unfailing; and forth from them proceeding enfold and permeate the whole wide world with constant thoughts of loving kindness, ample, expanding, measureless, free from enmity, free from all ill-will.' '' 
Shri Meher Baba also has clearly brought out the tremen≠dous importance of cultivating unfailing and unrestricted love. He says: ''The life of the spirit is an unceasing manifestation of Divine Love and spiritual under≠standing, and both these aspects of Divinity are unrestricted in their universality and unchallen≠geable in their inclusiveness. If there is lack of happiness or beauty or good≠ness in those by whom the Master is surrounded, those very things become for him the opportunity to shower his Divine Love on them, and to redeem them from the state of material or spiritual poverty. So his every-day responses to his wordly environment become expressions of dynamic and creative divinity which spreads itself and spiritualises everything in which he puts his mind.*" 

Lord Buddha has not given to us much positive and detailed information about Nibbana. Nega≠tively it is emaucipation from bondage and ignorance. But it is not, as it has sometimes been misunderstood to mean, extinction or a state of Nothingness. Mere extinction or nothingness can not be the final goal of life. It is most definitely a positive value the realisation of which surpasses all other attainments. But as it must remain unintelligible to those who are still in bondage positive descriptions are impossible. It is indescribable but it can be realised by every 
one for himself. Moreover Lord Buddha avoided detailed and positive descriptions of Nibbana for the very reasons which made him remain silent on the question about the existence of God. A purely theoretical curiosity on the subject does not help anybody on the Path. And what matters is getting on to the goal not merely whiling away our time in fruitless and unending guessings. We shall know about it when we get there. The Path has been clearly laid down by Reason itself. In the meanwhile, it is enough for us to have faith that there is a goal where we shall one day reach. ìThis principle of Nibbana, 0 King with its fullness of peace and blessedness IS. And if thou askest: 'What are the signs of Nibbana?' I answer: 'Freedom from danger and distress; confidence, peace, quietude, happiness, blessedness, delicacy, purity, spiritual refreshment.'î 
From the above account it becomes clear that Nibbana as depicted by Lord Buddha is not nothing although it is certainly not a thing. It is 
* Meher Baba Journal, Vol. I, No. 10, pp. 7-8. 

a positive state of consciousness. Further it is not a static condition of consciousness. It is charac≠terised by ìspiritual refreshmentî. It does not become stale. It is dynamic and creative. Shri Meher Baba brings out this positive aspect of spiritual perfection quite unambiguously when he says: ìWhen there is a happy and conscious blending of the finite and the Infinite, we have perfection. Then we have the Infinite revealing itself through the finite without getting limited thereby; and we have the finite transcending its sense of limitation in the full knowledge of its really being the revelation of the Infinite."* The recognition of the possibility of Nibbana leaves no room for our regarding Buddhism as a pessimistic reli≠gion merely because it recognises the existence of suffering in life. It is essentially an optimistic outlook on life because it declares that there is a way out of this suffering and there is the possibility of Nibbana. Nor can its Teaching be criticised on the ground that it does not add to the material comforts and luxuries of life. Such a criticism can be most fittingly answered in the following words of Lord Buddha: ''The gift of the Truth exceeds all other gifts. The savour of the Truth excels all other savours. The delight of the Truth surpasses all other delights. The desire after emancipation overmasters every sorrow." Shri Meher Baba also brings us to the Message of Hope concerning the ultimate destiny of life, which, he declares, is to enjoy eternally the "Infinite Existence, Knowledge and Bliss". 
