THOSE who would grasp the real significance of Shri Meher Baba’s work in connection with the Mad-Masts must always keep in mind that most of the Mad-Masts which he has been attending to are of an extraordinary type. The Mad-Masts must not be confused with ordinary mad persons in whom there has been insufficient development of mentality. There are many mental hospitals all over the world which seek to give psychic and medical help to the feeble-minded; and this in itself constitutes one of the most noble activities which, in modern civilisation, have sprung out of philanthropic motives. But the work of Meher Baba in connection his Mad-Masts is fundamentally different from the philanthrophic activities about the feeble-minded. 
Shri Meher Baba has himself pointed out the difference between the Mad-Masts and the ordinary 
mad persons. He says: 
"The Mad-Masts are God-mad. They are different from ordinary mad persons in respect of (1) the nature of mental states, (2) the methods which are followed in the respective fields, and (3) the spiritual value of the results secured through healing. These important points of difference each need individual consideration. 
"Differences in the Origin of Psychic Disturbance.—Persons who find shelter in the mental hospitals are usually those who have either insufficient mental development or those who have lost their balance of mind due to the operation of physiological or psychic forces of disruption. These physiological or psychic forces which cause mental disturbance are of the ordinary kind. In such cases, the collapse of the normal functioning of the mind has come about by unmanageable 

conflicts or disintegrating factors; and the best that can be hoped for by removing the causes of disturbance is the restoration of normality to the mind. But the cases of the Mad-Masts are altogether different in their origin as well as in their potentiality. The Mad-Masts often exhibit incapacity to attend to and deal with the ordinary situations of life and are in this respect comparable to those who are deranged in mind; but their departure from normal behaviour and responses is not due to lack of sufficient development or any chaotic forces of disruption, but is due to the suspension of interest from the ordinary pursuits of life and absorption in the spiritual realities encountered on the Path towards God-realization. 
"From the purely theoretical point of view, even these cases could be shown as cases of mental conflicts; but ordinary mental derangement is due to acute and insoluble conflict between incompat­ible sanskaras in connection with the world, whereas the unusual psychic states of the Mad-Masts are due to the dispersion of sanskaras by the powerful urge to realise God-states. 
The advancing urge to realise the Highest brings about the shattering of the given mental structure with all its normal tendencies and corresponding capacities; and this condition of inhibited mind is called Unmani State. The successful termination of this urge initiates the aspirant into the supra-mental state of integral under­standing and direct realization of the Supreme Self. 
"Differences in the Method of Healing.—In the case of ordinary mad persons the usual methods of cure consist in counteracting the physiological causes that might have contributed to the mental trouble. In the case of the mental trouble of psychic origin the patient might be separated from the circumstances which led to his trouble and sometimes is through the expert help of analysts enabled to bring to the surface the complexes and the conflicts which he was reluctant to face and solve and which eventually brought about the disruption of his mental processes. But the analyst cannot give him the power to solve these prob­lems; and the patient has to depend upon such power as may be 

immediately available to him. The part played by gentleness in the treatment of the analyst is considerable; but, even with all the gentleness which he may command, the analyst is often unable to achieve success owing to lack of capacity to arouse the latent powers of the patient. An ordinary analyst who has little insight into spiritual realities can hardly be expected to help the Mad-Masts whose experiences and objectives are entirely beyond the range of his imagination. 
Only a Perfect Master can give them the help that they badly need; for he sees through their spiritual yearnings and peculiar obstacles and is also able to push them forward towards the goal or bring them back to normality, through the use of occult methods and by bringing to bear upon them con­summate understanding, divine love and unfailing patience. 
“Differences in the Spiritual Value of Emergent States of Consciousness.— During this process of trans­cending the mind the make-up of the mind is subjected to so much disturbance that the person is unable use his mind in the ordi­nary way and to all appearances is like a mad man. Very often, common people actually take him to be insane: but the Masters who have direct and real insight into the working of his mind know the true genesis and the nature of his unusual mental state and they are in a position to understand his condition in terms of spiritual values and help him towards the realization of the goal which he is seeking in his own way. When these persons receive the right sort of help from a perfect Master they emerge into a supernormal state of perfect integra­tion and harmony. Thus the Mad-Masts have the immense poten­tiality of contacting and releasing divinity; while the ordinary mad persons can at best hope to return to normality by suitable treatment. 
“The Mad-Masts are God-intoxicated souls who in the joy of their advancing sojourn through the inner planes often lose their balance of mind; but this lost balance is in the end fully and finally re-established when the ob­structive factors in the journey are all overcome. As compared with the normal man 

the Mad-Masts seem to have less of balance; but it is important to remember that the normal man does not have true or lasting balance and has only an appearance of balance, because he can successfully strike a provisional compromise between the warring elements in his psyche and can bring his outward behaviour in conformity with the established conventions of the society. But in order that the mind should arrive at the true balance of understanding the provisional balance of compromise has to be considerably disturbed; and this is what happens in the case of the Mad-Masts. 
"However, in spite of the fact that many of the Mad-Masts do actually lose their balance while traversing the spiritual Path of inner life, they are often capable of rendering effective service to other aspirants who are less advanced than themselves. Though oblivious of worldly considerations and values they are sensitive to the spiritual needs of those who come into touch with them and as some of them are consciously stationed on the higher planes they can give just that type of occult help which is necessary. The Mad-Masts who are stuck up on the planes as well as the Mad-Masts who are entirely absorbed in the 'beatific vision' are both capable of being perfected through the divine help which they receive from the Master who knows all stages of the journey with its traps and dangers; and after being perfected they become perfect vehicles of the expression of the Divine Will to carry on God's plan on earth." 
Shri Meher Baba's help to his Mad-Masts is unique. He lives on the plane of Unity and for him there are no veils; and just as a child in its uttermost simplicity and unsophisticated outlook can come into perfect harmony with any surrounding irrespective of the distinctions of convention, Shri Meher Baba at once succeeds in establishing perfect understanding with the Mad-Masts. His method of helping the Mad-Masts works wonders because he can go down to their own level. He can thor­oughly enter into their lives because of his selfless universality and outgoing love which does not falter at spontaneous 

service of the humblest type. He is found to cut their hair, bathe them, feed them, attend to their physical ailments and even clear up their latrines. While attending to the Mad-Masts he is so forgetful of himself and identifies himself with their real problems so completely that their souls immediately recognise the Master as the medium. of divine intervention and dispensation and respond to him. Shri Meher Baba appeals to the deeper layers of the inner being of the Mad-Masts and evokes responses which are sure signs of the activisation of untapped resources and the release of the inward fund of spiritual energy which was so far inaccessible to them. 
Those who have had the privilege to see Shri Meher Baba at work in connection with the Mad-Masts are impressed by the special interest he takes in them. It would seem incomprehensible that the Master should thus be deeply concerned with persons who are, for all appearances either mad or short of normal mentality; and it would seem more in the fitness of things if he occupied himself solely with the scholars and the pandits and other learned persons who hold high and eminent position in the intellectual world. But even a casual observer cannot fail to notice that Shri Meher Baba devotes more time to these seemingly insane persons than to those who are shrouded in their robes of learning and are in the lime light. All this becomes intelligible when we realize that the task of Shri Meher Baba requires a group of workers who have had preliminary spiritual preparation. There is no doubt that those amongst the learned, who are alive to spiritual values, will be drawn into his work and will have an important part to play towards his task of creating a New Humanity. But the Mad-Masts, who, through their sincere experimentation with God, have invited to themselves the plight of being derailed from the normal lines of life are in spite of appearances to the contrary, nevertheless actually nearer the goal of perfect balance and integration; and Shri Meher Baba attends to them because they will, in their own ways, be qualified to shoulder a special type of responsibility in the world-task which is ahead of him. The interest which Shri Meher Baba takes in the Mad-Masts can be really understood and appreciated only 

in the light of his spiritual mission which is to prepare workers for restoring real sanity and whole­ness to the distracted mind of our age. 
