



How I Met Them And What 
They Told Me* 


BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA 

I have never searched for mystics both before and after knowing Baba whom I, also, met following a chain of typical coincidences. Therefore, when I thought of enquiring about the old lady amongst the Faqirs (mendicants), I had not the least idea that I was going to meet in the far away Sind, the unknown one about whom I had heard in my childhood, to have retired in solitude at a hill-station near Bombay where, as a boy roaming over the hills, I had often stopped by the small cavity in a rock overlooking the town below, wonder-ing as to what type of man could have sat there all alone for days together. 

    I purposely started my enquiries the wrong way by asking of the first Faqir found nearby: "Who is that mad mut≠tering old woman going about here and there, doing nothing?" I got the kick I had bargained for when the Faqir angrily replied: " Gadha kya jape zaf≠ranki qadarî (a donkey used to grass cannot grasp the saffron). MaióSaheb (revered mother), God forgive you, a mad woman?" He looked at me con≠temptuously 

* Continued from January 1939 issue. 



and added: "It is better for the wise men of the world to mind their own busi≠ness," and he walked away from me. 

    Finding a few more Faqirs leisurely smoking chilams (earthen pipes) in the little excuse of a hut at the other end of the boundary, clustered around a clean≠shaven, aged but smart looking man who was evidently their leader, I invited myself in and squatted amongst them quite informally as is done by a number of people who go to Faqirs in a wild goose chase after alchemy and permanent youth. But my reverential enquiries for the Mai-Saheb made them vie with one another in taxing their memories. I soon gathered that Mai-Saheb was one of the oldest inhabitants of the place since the life-time of Bachal-Shah. When first she called on the Master, she was married and must have been about thirty-five. Both she and her husband became greatly devoted to Bachal-Shah and used to call on him from time to time. Within a few years their visits to the Master became less formal and more frequent. The pair always came together, but finding Mai-Saheb growing happier in the direct service to the Master, her husband sometimes returned alone. Mai-Saheb was now often reported to the Master to be restless and preoc≠cupied at home, until one day, Bachal-Shah declared to the husband that it was time to leave her alone to serve a greater cause and carry out an impor≠tant spiritual mission for the remainder of her life. Since then, for about forty years, Mai-Saheb has been in that place during and after the life-time of the Master. 

When the group saw I was preparing to leave, one of them enquired for the place I hailed from. It is my experience, when travelling in the far-flung pro≠vinces of India, one has to indulge in a geographical jumble to make them grasp 'China ' in 'Greece'. I there-fore, informed them that I belonged to Bombay. Their leader, who had com≠pletely escaped my attention and who had also ignored me all this time, having maintained a strange and dis≠interested silence, spoke to me for the first time enquiring as to where I stayed in Bombay. 



While talking with ten others I had heard that he was referred to as Mustan-Shah. In appearance he was every inch a mystic in keeping with his lofty title. He made no secret of his life of renunciation, but, since an external rejection of the superficialities of life and the adoption of a mystic handle to the name is not necessarily a sign of true mysticism, Mustan-Shah did not impress me. On the contrary, his hawk-like eyes, cool and calculating de≠meanour and an idle enquiry about details made me give him a curt reply that I did not stay in Bombay proper. My dislike for this aggressive and forbidding personality grew all the more when he insisted upon detaining me further to satisfy an apparently idle curiosity. "I know," he said, "Bombay is more than one city with its suburbs like Mahim and Bandra. Perhaps you stay outside the city proper." Having no more interest in their company, I was eager to get away from the burning chilams of reeking gunja (hemp), but, to avoid being rude, I replied, " I come from  some  other city near Bombay. " 

"The nearest one is Thana," he remarked again very eagerly, "or perhaps you mean Poona. " I felt he was trying to impress upon the others his knowledge of the world outside of that little half-sleeping colony. I continued to be evasive, in order to baffle him, and told him almost insolently that I belonged to some other town near Poona. My antagonism towards him and my impatience to leave the place were too patent to be missed by a shrewd man like Mustan-Shah, yet he persisted in prompting me to continue the duel of words between us as if the matter was too important to be dropped undecided. "Let me remember, " he said, "a town near Poona, for one, Talegaon..." I did not let him finish his guess-work. He appeared to know that side of the country too well, and to cut the matter short I told him I was a resident of Lonavla. "I wonder if you know F.?" he asked. F., with his long proverbial white beard, was as prominent in that 

'' '

little town as the Duke s Nose  is, the point amidst the surrounding hills. This reference caught my imagination, and once again I settled myself as comfortably as I could in that crude little hut. Being prejudiced against Mustan-Shah, I de≠cided to give only pointed replies to his questions, and told him that F. was dead since ages. One after the other he repeated half a dozen names of those whom he knew and cared for, in one way or the other, and I continued re≠porting monotonously their passing away a long time back or a short time back as the case happened to be. In spite of the concern he showed for the people, to my amazement, he neither expressed sorrow nor any surprise for the unbroken chain of obituary. He would only say, "Oh," pause for a few moments with eyes steadily fixed on some object, and proceed again with his apparent quest for the dead, proving that he was as much a mystic inside as he was outside. On my part I felt as if we were taking stock of the little grave≠yard on that hill station, and began to thrill when he referred to the departed members of my own family one after another. 



    The weird conversation carne to its climax  when, hearing that my father had died only recently, he asked: "But Abdulla had a son and a daughter?" "The daughter is married and is all right in Poona," I said. "And the son is here at. your service." Following this drama≠tic disclosure, the stern shrewd look about his face and eyes swiftly melted into warmth of feeling and hospitality. The other Faqir. having left us alone to check up the dead, he had to call out loudly for one, as if he was going to order a grand feast for me. Some fruits were picked from the garden, and these he insisted serving to me personally. He did not ask any more questions and appeared keen to see that I ate all he had placed before me. After I had finished the fruits, he still appeared disinclined to any further conversation and would not so much as ask me as to why I was in Sind and how long I was going to stay there. 

    "Well, Mustan-Shah, " I said. "You have asked me so many questions, can I ask you a few?" "I don 't mind, " he replied. "But the point is," I continued. "I believe in mystics, yet I do not be≠lieve in what they say." He laughed outright and pointed 



out that it was a contradiction in terms. I explained, what I meant was the difficulty in getting the right replies. "That depends," he said, "on the questions to be asked. You never tell lies to a child when he asks for the explanation about a falling star, and tell him that it is the blow from an angel to drive away Satan from the heavens. You like a child 's thirst for knowledge, and humour him for the time being in the best way you can think of." "That is exactly what I meant to tell you, " I said. "I have had enough of humouring..." But before I could finish my sentence, he interrupted me with a smile and said,"I hope your questions would befit a grown-up man." This was a clean knock-over which made me blink, for the moment, for words until I could ask him as to how he happened to be in Lonavla. 

    "To tell you that, " said Mustan-Shah, "I will have to tell you a lot. Well then, listen. Being an only child, my father was very fond of me, and he, being a staunch believer theology, his one ambition was to see me grow into an Aalim (a theologian ). At an early age I could read the Quran-e-Shariff (the Holy Quran) very fluently, and in my early teens I became a Hafiz (having the Quran by heart), well versed with the general laws of Shariat (the external side of religion). Therefore I was made to study Arabic and translate the Word of God. I was looked upon as a promis≠ing student, and all went well with me until I came upon the verse in the Holy Book saying that God was nearer to me than the very chord of my life." He stopped abruptly and asked me if I could follow him clearly. "Yes, that you refused to be humoured any more, " I blurted out. "You are very impatient, " he said in good humour and continued explaining further. "The point was that, that happy phrase struck me as ad≠dressed to me personally, and I could not feel satisfied with the meaning of≠fered and explained to me by my good old tutor. 

"I began insisting that if God was so near to me, then He must be seen or felt. Either it was a meaningless statement, I began to argue, or it had some special hidden meaning beyond the pages of 



the dictionary. I became distracted and lost all interest in proceeding further with my studies. My teacher compla≠ined about me and I complained about my teacher, to my father who was greatly distressed to find me in an inexplicable fix of mental stagnation. A number of teachers were changed and a number of methods were tried before I was declared to have become a regular dunce, and left to myself, 

"My one hobby was to be on a look≠out for religious leaders and to discuss with them this question which had now become the question of my life. Hoping to his last breath that I may be pre≠vailed upon to proceed with my inter≠rupted career, my father died helping and encouraging me in approaching every available Aalim, until I met one who believed more in the love of the Lord than feared the raging fire in hell. The Mullas and Moulvies (priests and preachers) had made me go half mad with their talks and terrorizing threats. This particular Aalim invited me to call on him in privacy, when for the first time, I was not made to feel the black sheep in the fold of Islam. To my surprise, he did not try to argue with me at all. Patting my back, he told me very kindly. 'The Word of God, my boy, can never be meaningless, nor is there any secrecy about it. The meaning is too clear and direct to dare take it at its face value. But all cannot do so and undertake the Divine quest involved in its complete unfoldment. The answer to your question is beyond words. Stop asking and talking about it. Look it. Listen for it. ' With a sigh of yearning he added: 'Who knows, you may find out the answer which is already spread everywhere all about us.' 

"I began to look and listen in the wilderness that I felt all around me at that time. It was somewhere, about this period, that I selected a particular spot in Lonavla, and sat there in solitude for forty days." On checking up with him further details about that particular spot, I was greatly thrilled to find it was the same site around which I used to weave one of my boyish dreams of a Hindu yogi in full 



paint, with long hair and drooping eyes, in contrast to the sharp and clean≠shaven typical Mahomedan Qalandar type of Faqir who was now before me. "The way you referred to your solitary retirement in that place," I asked him, "shows that you did not get the required response?" "Of course not," he replied, "but luckily I was neither disappointed then nor during my subsequent wanderings practically all over the country for years and years thereafter." "Which also means, " I asked again, "that you are now here at the end of your search?" "Yes, I am now old enough to retire at one place," he an≠swerd slowly, as if winding up his conversation with me. However I per≠sisted in getting an unequivocal answer to the question at issue, and asked him point-blank, "Did you realize the meaning? " He became very impatient, and I could feel that he wanted me to leave him alone after he had half uttered an affirmative. But having asserted to have achieved the exper≠ience of "Nalmo Agrab, " the master key to the Holy Quran, I wanted to obtain from  him  an  interpretation of this fa-

mous phrase in his own words, and assured him, "One last question and I will go. What was that meaning?" "Don't you feel you are now behaving like a spoilt child?" he asked in a mixed tone of reproach and amusement, but added, "Have patience, you are going to get it."

    The last assurance and confirmation spoke volumes to me and was more than a compensation for Mastan-Shah 's unwillingness or inability to coin words which make no difference without the underlying Experience and Realization, like the well-known lines of the mystic poet and prince Asif-jah, the late Nizam of Hyderabad, that for all their lucidity and boldness remain, after all, words without meaning: 

"By the sign of Nahno-Agrab", Asif' understands, 

"Thou wilt become God, if thy  'I' is rooted out." 

There can never be a better friend than a mystic. True mystics never have an axe of their own to grind in any matter. They are always a source of inspiration and encouragement towards divine attainments.  They do not care 



and mind man-made barriers of society, "There are many who are in the way, country, caste, creed and religion. It is many who have experience, many who second nature to a mystic to help and are yogis, but few who are per-serve others without any motive but fect...Never speak ill of saints. They are that of service, for the sake of service the sign of Truth, and help to the and rendering relief to all life at large. world...My salutations to all those who In the course of a letter to me in His love God, who are saints, yogis, 

own hand, Baba wrote in January 1926: 	bhaktas,* and my namaskarÜ to Sadgurus! All these are me in different forms. " 
