The individual has to retain his individuality and realise his unitywith the whole consciously.” --Shri Meher Baba 
We have seen that the real significance of the individual is not exhausted by the mere fact of his being in some waysinstrumental to the realisation of values by other individuals. But at the same time, the relation of the individual to society is veryintimate, and it has importantimplications for the understanding of the essential nature of the individual. The individual always exists as a member of some whole. When he is conceived as being in complete isolation from natural and social environment, he becomes only a figment of imagination. He does not and cannot exist in a vacuum. He is always an element in some wider system which not onlyincludes him but makes him what he is. In the long run any limits which we give to the whole 
• 
of which he is a part will be found to be artificial. These limits have very often some validity for practical purposes, but from the philosophical point of view they are ultimately indefensible.
The real background for the study of the individual is the whole of the universe in its entirety. It is, however, fruitful to consider in particular his social environment; for he is constantly beingmoulded by his action and reaction with his fellow beings.
Apart from the interest directed towards his family, his friends, his country, or other social institutions, his life becomes, in the well-worn words of Hobbes, "sultry, poor, nasty, brutish and short". All the contents of his life which give meaning and direction to his practical activities are derived from his social 
environment. A man is, for instance, a teacher, a lawyer, a writer, a doctor, or a member of the legislatures. But he can only be any of these in a special social context. The needs of the society have created a demand for these functions, and he fits himself into such of these as commend themselves to him by virtue of his capacities or interests. The "station" in society has thus a profound influence on the course taken by the life of the individual. 
The pattern of the behaviour of the individual is, as a rule, largely determined by the conventions of the society in which he happens to move, and even his conceptions of morality and his general outlook on life is shaped by the influence of the various institutions of which he is a member. The atomic conception of society as being constituted of readymade individuals is erroneous. No individual can be what he is with­out the influence which he absorbs from his social environment. He cannot live apart from society any more than a plant can live apart from the soil from which it grows. 
It is true  that the iconoclast  or social reformer does not accept the existing customs, institutions or views without criticism. He applies a fresh and a vigorous mind to his social heritage, and examines, in the light of his searching criticism, everything that others accept without question. As a result of this examination he may come to reject the general notions of right and wrong which are current in the society he lives in; and he might even initiate great movements which modify the general structure and the conventions of the society. He is "original" in his outlook. But even the individual with an original mind, however, has to take his start from his social heritage, and begin by assimilating whatever is of true worth in it. 
The society, however, is not merely the source of the contents of the life of the individual. It is more than the background for his life, or an environment inviting his action and determining its specific nature. Other individuals are for him more than a means to an end. As they are themselves centres of action and feeling, all his actions and 
MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
reactions towards them come to be modified in the light of this understanding. Such a gradual transformation is best illustrated by the development of the relationship of the owner to his slave. 
The owner probably starts with certain interests of his own, and begins by looking upon his slave only from the point of view of his capacity to further his interests. The slave has at this stage an instru­mental value like that of the tool. The owner looks after his needs as an engineer might look after his engine. But, through his own experiences of dealing with the slave, he might admire his talents so much that he begins to consult him about his own plans occas­ionally. Further, through greater understanding, he might cease to look upon the slave as a means to his end only. At this stage the slave has come to be regarded as an end in himself, has the same status as the owner, and becomes his equal. But further, through increased association, he might even come to have real affection for him, and might begin to enter into his purposes and help him to realise them. At this stage the slave has be­come his friend. 
Utility is of course a part of the value of the slave. But so long as the owner is thinking only of his utility and is oblivious of his personal worth, his behaviour is bound to express only an imperfect appreciation of the real value of the slave. Elimination of all personal bias is always a condition of the true understanding and appreciation of other human beings, and personal bias is usually due to the stress of personal interests. 
Although personal bias is a great hindrance to the true appreciation of a social situation, personal exper­ience—direct or indirect—is the only way of arriving at it. In so far as the individual has the capacity to eliminate all personal bias and do justice to the points of view of other individuals, he tends to become "impersonal". To say, however, that he becomes impersonal, is some­what misleading, since in becoming "impersonal" the individual is only carrying further an activity which is inherent in his personality. The phrase "impersonal 
personality" is a paradoxical way of bringing out the capacity to judge and react to situations objectively. 
Every individual has some capacity to appreciate the intrinsic value and significance of other individuals quite apart from any bearing which they may have upon his own personal interests. The recognition of the intrinsic personal worth of every individual tends to bring into existence an ideal society which would be, in Kant's famous phrase, “a kingdom of ends". In this conception of the ideal society we have in a sense a direct antithesis of the purely organic conception of society, according to which the individual has only instrumental significance for society. 
The great democratic movements of history take their stand upon the equality and liberty of all individuals. From the philosophical point of view, equality does not mean an identity or similarity of functions, but the recognition of the intrinsic worth of each individual, and his liberty amounts to his claim to be given adequate opportunities for the fullest development of which he is capable. 
In an ideal society the individual will accept for himself a differ­entiated function, and the function would be determined by his capacities and the needs of all the individuals taken together. 
If the individual is to represent an autonomous unit having an intrinsic worth, it would seem impossible to avoid utter chaos and conflict of wills in a society where many individuals have to live together. But such a result does not follow, because the individual is not an impervious entity, but has the capacity to enter into the experience and the purposes of his fellow-beings, and accept them as his own. From the point of view of his own good, he finds it necessary to identify himself with others. It is by living for others that he can realise himself. It is by losing his life that he gains it. His is a life of self-maintenance through self-transcendence. His life is as naught until he voluntarily dedicates it for the service of other individuals among whom he happens to live. 
He comes to accept the common good as his own good. His own highest good is not anything private to himself, 
MEHER BABA JOURNAL 

but is essentially trans-subjective. The good is of course personal, in the sensethat it can be realised only in and bythe persons; but it is more than personal in the sense that it comprehends the good of all. If weeliminate from his consciousness the interest he takes in his family, friends, institutions, country, church, etc., thereremains practically nothing in whichhe can really interest himself.
If we consider the ego as a permanent entity, we are really substantiating an abstraction. The ego is essentially of the nature of apowerful complex in the mind, perverting the outgoing activity characteristic of all the manifestations of the spirit. It is like a vortex in the current of a river. Its reality is constituted by its capacityto restrict the field of interests and shut out the larger possibilities of life. The essential feature of comprehensive individuality is the dissolution of the ego which is a hindrance to the fuller and freer life of the individual. For a freer and fuller life the distinction between the self and the others has to be 
• 
completely transcended. 
The higher reaches of the humanspirit include experiences in whichthere is a more or less complete absence of the distinction between the self and the other. In love, forinstance, the individual is completely"impersonal" in the sense of havingno thought of himself. It is a mistaketo consider love as being only aninstance of selfishness on the groundthat in love the individual realises a value. The realization of a value for himself is far from being a motive in genuine instances of love, although itis, so to say, an incidental and uncontemplated result of love. In love the individual is concerned with the good of the objects of his loveand not with any significance whichthey may have for himself. But at thesame time the object of love is notexplicitly regarded as being an other. The sense of separate consciousnessis absent in love. 
In the world of spiritual membe­rship, as Bosanquet has pointed out,"there are no claims and counter­claims".* In this attitude the individual 

 

ThValue	
  andDestiny	
  ofthIndividual,	
  p153
 

makes no claims for himself. Nor do we expect that he will make any such claims. The ablest man in society does not and may not ask for rewards. His contribution to society is quite out of proportion to what he may gain from it in return. The true conception of social justice might, therefore, be summed up in the well-known formula, "for each according to his needs, and from each according to his capacities". 
On the one hand, the society is constituted of individuals who have an inalienable and intrinsic worth of their own. But on the other hand, the individual at his highest makes no personal claims for himself. An ideal structure of society will, therefore, have to be based upon the full recognition of these two important features. There will be no room in such a society for any actions, private or political, in which the individual comes to be regarded as a means only. But, on the contrary, there will be opportunities for all for complete self-development. And the individual will be helped to develop on his own lines, and make his own unique contribution to the life of the society. 
