Shovq 
BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA
   Imagine a firing squad lined in front of a blindfolded victim and the order "Fire" is rapped out. Simultaneous with the loud cracks, one of the hearers will crumple down into oblivion. 
   Think of two loving hearts and the ecstasy, the thrills and the feeling of "flying high into the clouds" that a whis≠pered "darling" can produce. 
   Take the polished "no" that a job hunter gets for the hundredth time, after knocking about from place to place for months together, in spite of being pre≠pared to do any odd job; or the polite "yes" of a doctor to the query of an anxious mother whether her only ailing child is in serious danger, and we find each word has a world of its own under the relative circumstances. 
   There are also words that often stand for inexpressible depths and heights of meaning, even when shorn of such dreams and visions.
   The most easily understood and ab≠solutely the least understood word in currency is God. Gousali Shah Qalan≠der, a great Master, has aptly described God to be so easy to understand that every child knows Him, and so difficult to know that numberless heroes have sacrificed their very lives in the pursuit thereof. 
   Like a child, the world at the peak of the present so-called civilizatation knows God only to be thought of at the fag-end of the day after playing with bombs, machine guns, torpedoes and poison gas. But a child has no full-stop to its knowledge, like people of almost every class and creed these days who know God so well and completely that, if the art of spirituality is ridiculed, the science of mysticism is mocked. Matters are made worse by some sincere but arm-chair amateurs when spirituality is confused with spiritualism and mysti≠cism is muddled into mystery. 
   Mysticism is more to be believed in and experienced than understood and explained and spirituality has to be lived 

and practised in every walk of life. 
   In the world of reality amidst this dream of a creation, personal experience and individual realization alone can lead to Truth and, therefore, words have necessarily to be appreciated on the touchstone of painstaking perception. 
   Even some ordinary words in every language express extraordinary ideas under particular usage and need more than many sentences to bring into relief the true significance thereof in another language. "Shovq" is one such word in the Urdu language of the Mohamedans in India. Ordinarily, it means "liking for". But in relation to mysticism, it has a greater significance and a world of meaning about it. When used in connection with spiritual subjects, "Shovq" can well be said to express "early enthusiasm", "deep attraction", "the flush of spiritual happiness", the "pleasure of initiation", "intense long≠ing", and so on. The greatest importance of the word in such cases lies in that it stands for the very first stage of one's spiritual unfoldment. 
   Whether  the  stage  of 'Shovq' results out of intellectual convictions or emo≠tional experiences, through outside in≠fluence or self-hypnosis, those who have passed through this stage can have no two opinions, that it is something really very grand! 
   New vistas of thought and feelings, indescribable flights of imagination, a novel angularity of perception, are but a few of the aspects of the change that takes place in one's outlook on life. Un≠important things present problems of prime importance, the prattle of a baby conveys spiritual truths, inanimate ob≠jects bear out messages of the first mag≠nitude. 
   And where this happens under the direct influence of a Master, in nine cases out of ten, strange signs and scenes are witnessed and novel inci≠dents take place automatically and independently without any thought, intention or idea on the part of the person concerned. 
   A Master not infrequently skips over many or all stages or states in advancing anyone on the spiritual path. Even God-realization can be given in the twinkling of an eye, as 

 
was done by Hazrat Babajan of Poona in the case of Baba. 
   All the same, many of Baba's devotees have had the stage of "Shovq". I remem≠ber the year 1921-22 when Baba first began collecting his group. 
With all my wits about me, quite cognisant of my surroundings, without finding any-thing wrong with the senses of seeing and hearing, the experience of death I once had all of a sudden, in broad day light one afternoon, made me actually feel two separate existences at one and the same time, so much so that, the same evening I confided the matter to Khaksahib. I selected him delib≠erately, knowing that others would laugh at me or think I was out of my senses. I asked him to do me a favour.    "Of course anything that I can, tell me," replied Khaksaheb. Then with all the seriousness that I could demand, I questioned, "Will you tell me if I am alive or dead?" What I wanted from him was a straight simple but a serious confirmation one way or the other, to enable me to reconcile myself to the peculiar state  I was experiencing  for so many hours. It was also natural for Khaksaheb to smile, pat my back and ask me to go and take rest. Although it is now sixteen years, to this day I feel sure that it was no hallucination or delusion of any kind. 
   The more the intensity and the depth of the "Shovq", the greater the chances of reaching the goal as well as getting away from the goal. This paradox is due invariably to the fact that the duration of the stage of "Shovq" is often short lived. On the other hand, the period of under≠going discipline, putting in service, maintaining personal contact with a Master, or awaiting the right moment, is indefinite and generally results in the readjustment of all hopes and expect≠ations based on "Shovq" itself. 
   Naturally, the reaction has to be borne with the patience of Job and a steadfast perseverance in hope and faith by those who are not ripe enough to get on the next stage or attain the ultimate goal quickly. Amongst these latter, some are likely to overestimate "Shovq" and smart under the subsequent disillu≠sionment of great spiritual advance≠ment; while those who unfortunately 

feel "Shovq" as a proof of self-suffi≠ciency look forward to quicker illumi≠nation as a matter of course, and therein lies the greatest danger of a setback. Both overestimation and self-suffi≠ciency must be guarded against, which once attained, the goal is but a quest- ion of time. It is irrevocable Destiny. 
   The Perfect Master, if one is fortunate to have one, eliminates  the  danger  of retrogression and stabilizes the aspirant on the path by subtly leading him through the stage of "Shovq" to resignation. 