In true karma yoga or the life of perfect action there is 
proper adjustment between the material and the spiritual 
aspects of life. In this type of life, 
THE KARMA-
consciousness is not fettered to the
YOGIN FACES THE PROBLEMS mundane and material things, but at the OF LIFE same time it is not allowed to fly away from everyday existence. The mind is not allowed to be immersed in the material life of gnawing wants, nor is it allowed to be merged in spiritual bliss. But it is used to face and tackle the problems of life from the point of view of spiritual understanding. Proper adjustment between the material and the spiritual aspects of life is not secured by MATTER HAS TO giving equal importance to them: it BE USED AS 
is not secured by taking something 
PLIABLE INSTRU-from the material and something from 
MENT FOR THE 

EXPRESSION OF the spiritual, and then striking a THE SPIRIT 
balance between the two. The spirit must and ever will have an inviolable primacy over 
MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
matter, but the primacy is expressed, not by avoiding or rejecting matter, but by using it as an adequate vehicle for the expressions of the spirit. So, in intelligent adjustment, matter has to play the role of a pliable instrument for the self-manifestation of the spirit, and must not in any way become obtrusive in its own rights. Just as the musical instrument is valuable only if it gives vent to the song of the musician, and becomes a hindrance if it does not yield complete subservience, matter is valuable if it gives free and adequate expression to the creative flow of life, and becomes an obstacle if it interferes with it. 
Owing to the multifarious cravings of the mind, matter has a tendency to assume importance for itself. So for a drunkard wine is everything; for the greedy man the 
hoarding of money is all important; 
and for the flirt the chase of sensa­
tions is the supreme end of life. 
These are examples of how, 
through the diverse cravings of the 
mind, matter becomes unduly 
obtrusive and perverts the expressions of the spirit. The way to restore the dignity of the spirit is not to reject matter but to use it for the claims of the spirit; and this is possible only when the spirit is free from all cravings and is fully conscious of its own true status. When this is achieved, man may have material goods, but is not caught up in them. When 
necessary, he may use them as means for the life of the spirit; but he is not allured by them, or does not become restless for them, because he realizes that in themselves they do not constitute the real significance of life. He dwells in the material and social environment without any hankering for them; and being unattached, he is able to convert them into the field for spiritual life. 
When once true adjustment between spirit and matter is secured, there is no phase of life which cannot be utilized for the expression of Divinity. No longer is there any need to run away from everyday life and its tangles. The freedom of the spirit which is sought by avoiding contact with the world and by going to the caves or mountains is a negative free­dom. When such retirement is temporary and is meant to digest worldly experiences and develop detachment, it has its own advantages. It gives breathing time in the race of life. But when such retirement is grounded in the fear of the world or lack of confidence in the spirit, it is far from being helpful towards the attainment of real freedom. Real freedom is essentially positive, and it must express itself through the unhampered dominion of the spirit over matter. 
This is the true life of the spirit. 

The life of the spirit is the expression of infinity, and as such knows of no artificial limits. True spirituality is not to be mistaken for an 


exclusive enthusiasm for some fad. It is not concerned with any "ism”. When people seek spirituality apart from life as if it had nothing to do with the material world, their search is futile. All creeds and cults 

SPIRITUALITY 

have a tendency to emphasize some 
COVERS THE 

fragmentary aspect of life; but true
WHOLE OF LIFE 

spirituality is totalitarian in its outlook. The essence of spirituality does not consist in a specialised or narrow interest in some imagined part of life, but in a certain enlightened attitude to all the various situations which obtain in life. It covers and includes the whole of life. All the material things of this world can be made subservient for the Divine game; and when they are thus subordained, they become auxiliary for the self-affirmation of the spirit. 
The value of material things depends upon the part they play in the life of the spirit. In themselves, they are neither good nor bad; they become good or 
THE BODY IS NOT 

bad according to whether they help 
NECESSARILY A 

or hinder the manifestation of 
HINDRANCE FOR 

Divinity through matter. Take for 
SPIRITUAL LIFE 

example the place of the physical body in the life of the spirit. It is a mistake to set up the antithesis between the "flesh" and the spirit. Such contrast almost inevitably ends in an unqualified condemnation of the body; but the body stands in the way of spiritual fulfilment only if it is pampered as having claims in its own right. 
But its proper function is rightly understood when it is looked upon as ancillary for spiritual purposes. The rider needs a horse if he is to fight the battle, though the horse can become an impediment if he refuses to be completely submissive to his will. In the same way, the spirit needs to be clothed in matter if it is to come into the full possession of its own possibilities, although the body can at times become a hindrance if it refuses to be compliant for the requirements of the spirit. If the body yields to the claims of the spirit, as it should, it is instrumental in bringing down the kingdom of heaven on earth. It becomes a vehicle for the release of Divine Life, and when it sub-serves this purpose, it might aptly be called the temple of God on earth. 
Since the physical body and other material things can be availed of for the life of the spirit, true spirituality does not 
take any hostile attitude to them. In 
fact it seeks expression in and 
through them. Thus the perfect man 
does not look down upon the things 
of beauty or works of art, the 
attainments of science or the achievements of politics. The things of beauty can be degraded by being made the objects of craving or jealous and exclusive possessiveness; the works of art can often be used to augment and exploit egoism and other human frailties; the attainments of science can be used for mutual destruction, as in modern wars; 


and political enthusiasm, without spiritual insight, can perpetuate social and international chaos: but all these can also be rightly handled and spiritualised. The things of beauty can become the source of purity, happiness and inspiration; the works of art can ennoble and raise the consciousness of people; the attainments of science can redeem humanity from unnecessary suffering and handicaps; and political action can be instrumental in establishing a real brotherhood of humanity. So the life of the spirit does not consist in turning away from the worldly spheres of existence, but it consists in reclaiming them for the Divine purpose, which is to bring love, peace, happiness, beauty and spiritual perfection within the reach of everyone. 
However, he who would live the life of the spirit must remain detached in the midst of worldly things without 
becoming cold or indifferent to 
them. Detachment should not be 
misunderstood as lack of apprecia­
tion. It is not only compatible with true evaluation of things but is its very condition. Craving creates delusion and prevents right perception; it nourishes obsessions and sustains the feeling of dependence upon external objects. But detachment promotes right understanding, and facilitates the perception of the true worth of things without making consciousness dependent upon external things. To see things as they are is to grasp their real significance as parts of the manifestation of the One 


DIVINE LOVE IS  Divine  Love  and  spiritual  under- 
CREATI VELY  standing, and both these aspects of  
DYNAMIC IN  Divinity  are  unrestricted  in  their  
RELATION TO  universality  and  unchallengable  in  
ENVIRONMENT  their  exclusiveness.  Thus  Divine  

Life, and to see through the veil of their apparent multiplicity is to be free from the insistent obsession for anything in its imagined isolation and exclusiveness. So 
the life of the spirit is to be found in comprehensiveness which. is free from clinging, and appreciation which is free from entanglement. It is a life of positive freedom in which the spirit infuses itself into matter, and shines through it without submitting to any curtailment of its own claims. 
The things and the happenings of this earthly existence are looked upon as foreign, only so long as they are not 
engulfed in the advancing tide 
TRUE SPIRITUALITY 

of comprehensive spirituality. 
IS COMPREHENSIVE 

But when once they find their right place in the scheme of life, each of them is seen to participate in the symphony of creation. Then the expression of spirituality does not require a separate or exclusive field; it does not become degraded by being concerned with the ordinary physical, intellectual and emotional needs of people. The life of the spirit is unified and integral existence which does not admit of exclusive or unrelated compartments. The life of the spirit is an unceasing manifestation of 
Love does not require any special type of context for mak­
plementary aspect  of  the  life  of  the  spirit  must  be  
SPIRITUAL  distinguished  from  the  worldly  
UNDERSTANDING  wisdom· which is the quintessence  
IS NOT BORN OF  of the conventions of the world.  
BLIND IMITATION  Spiritual wisdom does not consist  

ing itself felt; it need not await some rare moments for its expression, nor is it on the lookout for sombre situations which savour of special sanctity. It discovers its field of expression in every incident and situation which might, by an unenlightened person, be passed over as too insignificant to deserve attention. Ordinary human love is released only under suitable conditions. It is a response to certain types of situations, and is relative to them. But 
Divine Love which springs from the source within is in­dependent of stimuli. It is, therefore, released even in circumstances which would be looked upon as unfavourable by those who have tasted only of human love. If there is lack of happiness or beauty or goodness in those by whom the Master is surrounded, these very things become for him the opportunity to shower his Divine Love on them, and to redeem them from the state of material or spiritual poverty. So his everyday responses to his worldly environment become expressions of dynamic and creative divinity which spreads itself and spiritualises everything in which he puts his mind. 
The spiritual understanding which is the other com-
in the unquestioning acceptance of the ways of the world. 
The ways of the world are almost always a collective effect 
of the actions of materially inclined people. Worldly people consider something to be right and make it right for persons of similar inclination. Therefore the blind following of convention does not necessarily secure wise action. The life of the spirit cannot be a life of uncritical imitation; it must have its basis in the true understanding of values. 
