Shri Meher Baba 

IMPRESSIONS* 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 

So often in still contemplation, sitting in groups around Him we spend hours of supreme inspiration when into the awed stillness of our hearts His unfathomable words resound: "I am the only Reality." 

To someone kneeling before Him in adoration, He says: "She is all loveóno desireóI am above purity." 

To another among His children, demonstrating love in their own individual way, He says: "It is all the same love." 

Someone of fierce nature, a man insatiable in self-satisfaction of life, spiritually yet immature, too proud to dare to be confronted with one like Shri Meher Baba, who after having met Him said: "I went determined to oppose, my mind was full of doubts. When I en≠tered the room, I felt disarmed by His look as of a pure child. That ex≠perience I can hardly describe. I thought I was going to see a man, but I met someone far above the ordinary. His form, though looking natural and human, was of different texture. He appeared translucent. He knew all about my life as if it were His own. He read my most remote thoughts. He moved within me a realm of feeling which I had ignored, one commonly calls it heart; but it is that real heart which we know only because through≠out all life, we long for its better feelings. When I told Him about my struggles, I saw that my suffering had left traces of its unworthy drama on His face. I had to kiss His compassionate face. I shall never forget His super≠human kindness and tolerance and His child-like humour. We talked about things worldly and matters of everyday. I realized that all was the clean clear expression of some unfathomable just and lawful plan which since I have accepted by the grace of faith that 


He awakened in me." 

Someone else said to Him: "As soon as I saw Him I broke out in loud laughter of joy. He and I at once felt like two pals on some vacation game. I embraced Him like my nearest friend. He appeared so white. I thought I had dreamt of purity when I was a boy, but I can, for the first time, say I experienced Purity. " 

Children are more able to recognize Him. How often do we witness the intuitive feeling guiding them, making them see what we cannot see; in the most unexpected manner they are caught in His Divine Ray. Once, while walking in the private grounds be≠longing to one of His Swiss disciples, He approached a little girl of seven picking apples from under a tree. Baba graciously bending over her looked deep into her eyes. Startled, in awe, by the blessing that she had received, she ran to her mother to share her sweet experience calling out: "O Mummy, Mummy, never has anyone looked at me with so much love." 

Wherever He appears, here or there in East or West, His miraculous body of superhuman texture projects the divine fluid substance with equal grace to respond to the need of all. 

In New York in one of the greater gatherings held in the private home of one of Baba's friends, this startling fact happened. Many people are standing in line to pay their respects to Him, when suddenly, Baba, interrupting the cere≠mony, is pointing to a person standing far back in the crowd, a lady none of us knew. Baba 's persistent sign meant for the person to come to meet Him before any other. To the message given by one of us she responded in embarrassed manner as if wanting to evade the call apologetically, explaining that she merely had come to accompany a friend. Baba repeats the insistent sign for the second time. Her attitude suddenly changes and she walks toward Him as if irresistibly drawn. Baba 's hand stretches toward her with visible expression of joy. Her embarrassment grows almost to a state of confusion which Baba with the following words instantaneously counteracts: "Do not worry," He said, "I know everything and I will help you. " Involuntarily she sheds tears. After a few moments 





  

Baba bids her leave, and again she disappears in the crowd while the reception is ordered to continue. He has found the old needing soul which, for some unfathomable reason, that day was due to meet Him. A week later this stranger calls me over the phone. She said: "I am the woman you so gra≠ciously introduced to the Master. May I come and see you as something wonderful has happened to me?" On acquaintance she told me her life story and impressed me with the sorrowful and tragic conditions in her family life, because of the hatred between herself and her own child, a girl of twenty. Mother and child had persecuted each other for twenty years. The mother said, "I have never been able to under≠stand this as my child was born in love. Never have I been able to overcome the detestation for my child; I have never felt inclined to kiss her. When the Master asked me to meet Him I did not know why. My own unhappiness had become so much of a habit that I did not even know that I was in need of help. When the Master greeted me with so much kindness I did not remember being impressed in any way, not even to have been able to objectively ob≠serve Him. I was like one in a dream who suddenly wakes up and feels carried off, led by an invisible friend for some good reason. This morning I awakened from an unusually deep sleep bathed in ecstasy of love and bliss. I could not understand what had hap≠pened to me. It was so powerfully active making me react without the use of my will. I rose from my bed and walked into the room of my child who was still asleep. Drawn by irresistible love I embraced her...For the first time, in both of our lives, did we feel a bondóa bond that was more than mother love and child love. My ex≠perience was contagiously felt in her, and is today a tender relationship which reflects happiness for the whole family. Dear friend," she continued, "who is this man? I remember similar stories about Jesus imparting Grace of Love."

 "I am in you, with you always, " He says. 

If one of us fell ill, He feels it. From a distance before we call for help, He cables, advising some cure that He the 

Knower of all science, diagnosing our condition as no scientific ordinary ex≠pert can, knows is right.

    I have a friend, a Catholic and super≠stitiously drawn to anyone who de≠monstrates physical miracles. She was introduced to Baba at a time when very ill, with a tumour in the brain and paralysis of her right arm. Baba is indifferent to demonstrate powers, for whosoever it may be, but He granted her a short audience of 'only two minutes'. Without giving her time for explanation or complaints, He passed His hand over her forehead and over her arm, prescribing by the following statement the cure to follow: "Do as I say and I shall heal you. " The woman, accustomed to conventional formalities felt shocked at Baba's short and matter-of-fact informal ways. Three days later she was attacked by acute fever and had to be taken to the hospital. In the third night Baba appears before her like a luminous projection. He holds between His finger tips a reddish bullet on which He blows His divine breath and makes it vanish. In that same instant the woman feels life re-entering her arm; she has a sensation of immediate release in her head. The tumour in her brain, naturally bursting, releases the poisonous matter. The woman is healed. Today she is one of those who, by reason of a physical miracle, believes in Baba 's superhuman exis≠tence. We have witnessed more than one physical healing of which this is one of the many. But the spiritual heal≠ing which cannot be reckoned by any science is of far greater importance to our life in need of resurrection in the spirit.

    Shri Meher Baba says: "I have come not to teach but to awaken." 

Shri Baba's internal and external work is all one. While standing before a Christian Chapel one Easter morning in Murree, Himalayas, in 1933, He said: "All worship returns to me. The sigh whithin the prayer is the same in the heart of the Christian, the Mahomedan, the Jew. They are indivisibly longing for the same God." They are unconsciously drawn to Him. They all unconsciously feel the same, but express it through different languages. There is only one fundamental Faith, 





  

and that is the pure form of religion which Shri Meher Baba will reawaken in the heart of man. 

His word is the will of divine origin. We often realize the immediate effect of the power of His word, and wonder in awe over the mysterious reaction. He is uninterrupted conscious action in the mental, subtle and gross spheres. In the one all pure form of 'Impersonal Love' He performs God-action. He practises God-Life. He will create God-like hu≠man beings. 

We earn through Him the feeling that we in Him participate in the 'indivisible divine life, ' that we and God are one pure functionóone lifeóone working will sharing in the scope of all exis≠tence. That living trial one calls life, directed and used by Him, turns to be impersonal blessing. We do no more worry to lose advantages in being bad, nor do we speculate to be good for our own sake. Surrendered in Him, good or bad, our contribution in good or bad results immune. 

Through the blending of head and heart we earn the impersonal view≠point. In that viewpoint is peace. 

He does not preach ... He gives us the example ... He shows us how to be tolerant, to recognize in everyone 's in≠dividual viewpoint the right, yet veiled, impersonal standpoint. In a case of two opposite opinions He, the wise im≠partial Friend, will turn toward either of the opponents and create in both the same selfless reaction that makes them give in and understand. He will say: "How can there be misunderstanding when there is Love?" The mysterious adjusting power of His word makes personal motives vanish into unimpor≠tance and the pure impersonal stand≠point prevails in the tranquilized minds. 

Some may use strong temper to impose his own will on some one else. To the one who is weak and feels hurt He will say: "Why do you feel hurt?" and to the other who did willingly or unwillingly create pain He merely will smile in compassion. We then know. He does not teachóHe awakens. 



(to be continued) 
