Meher Baba 
on 

The Search for God 
MOST persons do not even suspect the existence of God and they are naturally not very keen about God. There are others who through the 
Grades of Beliefs influence of tradition belong to in God some faith or another and catch 
the belief in the existence of God from their surroundings; but their faith is just strong enough to keep them bound to certain rituals, ceremonies or beliefs and rarely possesses that vitality which is necessary to bring about a radical change in the entire attitude to life. There are still others who are philosophically minded and they have an inclination to believe in the existence of God either because of their own speculations or because of the assertions of others. For them, God is at best a probable hypothesis or an intellectual idea. But such lukewarm belief in itself can never be a sufficient incentive for launching upon a serious search for God. They do not know of God from personal knowledge and God is not for them an object of intense desire or endeavour. 

A true aspirant is not content with such knowledge of spiritual realities as might be based on hearsay; nor is he satisfied with pure inferential 
knowledge. For him, the 
spiritual realities are not the 
object of idle thinking and the 
acceptance or the rejection of 
these realities are both fraught 
with momentous implications for his inner life. So, he naturally insists upon direct knowledge about them. This might be illustrated from the life of a great sage. One day, he was discussing spiritual topics with his friend who was quite advanced upon the Path. While they were thus engaged upon this discussion their attention was diverted to a dead body which was being carried by their side. "This is the end of the body but not of the soul," his friend remarked. "Have you seen the soul?" asked the sage. "No" was the answer of his friend. And the sage remained sceptical about the soul, for he insisted upon personal knowledge. 
But though the aspirant can not be content with secondhand knowledge or mere guesses he does not close his mind against the possibility of there being such spiritual realities as might not have come within 
his experience. In other words, 

he is conscious of the limitations of 
his own individual experience and 
he refrains from making it the measure of all possibilities. He has an open mind for all things which are beyond the scope of his experience. If he does not accept them on hearsay he does not also rush to active disbelief in them. It is true that the limitation of experience often tends to restrict the scope of the working of imagination and a person comes to believe that there are no realities other than such as may have come within the ken of his past experience; but usually as a result of some incidents or happenings in his own life he may come out of his dogmatic enclosure and become really open-minded. 
This stage of transition may also be illustrated from a story from the life of the same sage who happened to be a Prince. Once, some days after the 
incident of discussion (mentioned


An Illustrative 
above), as he was riding on horse-

Story 
back he came upon an ordinary 
pedestrian coming towards him from the opposite direction. Since the way of the horse was thus blocked by the presence of the pedestrian the sage arrogantly ordered him to clear the way for him. The pedestrian refused to clear the way for him and so the sage got down from his horse and they entered upon the following conversation, "Who are you?'' asked the pedestrian. ìI am the Princeî answered the sage. "But I do not know you to be the Prince," said the pedestrian and continued, "I shall admit you as being a Prince only when I know you to be a Prince and not otherwise.'' This encounter awakened the sage to the fact that God may exist even though he did not know Him from personal experience, just in the same way as he was actually a Prince although the pedestrian did not know it from his own personal experience. And now that his mind was open for considering the possible existence of God he set himself to the task of deciding that question in right earnest. 
God either exists or does not exist: if He exists, search for Him is amply justified; and even if He does not exist there is nothing to lose by seeking Him. But man does 
not usually turn to a real search 

Ordinary Man is for God as a matter of voluntary 
Indifferent to the and joyous enterprise; he has got 
Existence of God to be driven to this search by a 
disillusionment about those worldly things which allure him and from which he cannot take away his mind. Ordinary man is completely engrossed in his activities concerning the gross world; and he lives through its manifold experiences of joys and sorrows without even suspecting the existence of a deeper Reality. He tries as best as he can to have pleasures of the senses and also to avoid different kinds of suffering. 
136 
'Eat, drink and be merry' is his philosophy; but in spite of his unceasing search for pleasure he can not altogether avoid suffering and even when he succeeds in having pleasures of the senses he is often satiated by them. While 

he thus goes through the daily round of varied experiences, there often arises some occasion when he begins to ask himself, 'What is the end of all this?' Such occasion may arise out of some untoward happening for which a person is not mentally prepared; it may be the baffling of some confident expectations; or it may be some important change in his situation demanding radical readjustment and the giving up of established ways of thought and conduct. Usually such occasion arises out of the frustration of some deep craving of which he was possessed. If a deep craving happens to come upon an impasse so that there is not the slightest chance of its being ever fulfilled, the psyche receives such a shock that it can no longer accept the type of life which might have been hitherto accepted without question. 
Under such circumstances a person may be driven to utter desperateness; and if the tremendous power which is generated by the psychic disturbance remains 
uncontrolled and undirected it may 
even lead to serious derangement 
of mind or attempts to commit 
suicide. Such catastrophe over≠
comes those in whom 
desperateness is allied with 
thoughtlessness, for they allow impulse to have free and full sway. The unharnessed power of desperateness can only work destruction. But the desparateness of a thoughtful person under similar circumstances is altogether different in results because the energy which it releases is intelligently harnessed and directed towards a purpose. In the moment of such divine desperateness man takes the important decision of discovering and realising the aim of life. There thus comes into existence the true search for lasting values. Henceforth the burning query which refuses to be silenced is, 'What does it all lead to? ' 

When the psychic energy of man is thus centred upon the finding out of the goal of life, he is using the power of desperateness creatively. He can no longer 
be content with the fleeting 


Divine Desperate-
things of this life and he is

ness is the Beginn≠
thoroughly sceptical about the

ing of Spiritual 
ordinary values which he had so 

Awakening 
far accepted without doubt. His only desire is to find out the Truth at any cost and he does not rest satisfied with anything short of the Truth. Divine desperateness is the beginning of spritual awakening because it gives rise to the aspiration for God≠realisation. In the moment of divine desperateness when everything seems to give way, man decides to take all risks for realising any possible significance, which might so to say lie behind the veil. 
All the usual solaces have now failed him; but at the same time his inner voice refuses to reconcile itself completely with the position that life is devoid 
of all meaning. If he does not 


The Alternatives: 
posit some hidden reality which 

God or Nothing 
he has not hitherto known, there 
is nothing at all which is worth living for. For him the only two alternatives are either there is a hidden spiritual reality which prophets have described as God, or everything is meaningless. The second alternative is utterly unacceptable to the whole of man's personality therefore he must perforce try the first alternative. Thus man turns to God when he is at bay in wordly affairs. 
Now, since there is no direct access to this hidden reality which he posits, he looks upon his usual experiences as possible avenues leading to a significant 
beyond; and thus he goes back 

Revaluation of 
to his usual experiences with 

Experience in the 
the purpose of gathering some 

Light of Posited 
light on the Path. This involves 

Divinity 
looking at everything from a new angle of vision and entails a reinterpretation of each experience. He now not only has experience but tries to fathom its spiritual significance; he is not merely concerned with what it is but with what it means 
138 
in the march towards this hidden goal of existence. And all this careful revaluation of experience results in his gaining an insight which can not come to him before he begins his new search. 
Revaluation of an experience amounts to a new bit of wisdom and each addition to spiritual wisdom necessarily brings about a modification of the general attitude to life. So 
the purely intellectual search for 

New Insight means God or the hidden spiritual 
Experimenting with reality, has its reverberations in 
Perceived Values the practical life of man; his life 
now becomes a real experiment with perceived spiritual values. The more he carries on this intelligent and 
purposive experimentation with his own life the deeper 
becomes his comprehension of the true meaning of life, until finally he discovers that as he 

The Finding of was undergoing a complete 
God is Coming to transformation of his psychic being 
Oneís Own Self he was arriving at the true 
perception of the real significance of life as it is. With the clear and tranquil vision of the real nature and worth of Life he realises that God Whom he has been so desperately seeking is no stranger or a hidden and foreign entity. He is the Reality itself and not a hypothesis; he is the Reality as seen with undimmed visionóthat very Reality of which he is a part and in which he has had his entire being and with which he is in fact identical. So, though he begins by seeking some thing utterly new he really arrives at a new understanding of the Ancient thing. The spiritual journey does not consist in arriving at a new destination in the sense of having what a person did not have or, in the sense of his being, what he was not; but it consists in the dissipation of his ignorance concerning himself and life and the gradual growth of that understanding which begins with spiritual awakening. The finding of God is coming to one's own self. 
