






Shri Meher Babaís Tour 

OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA* 
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 


    Baba's brother J. has arrived from Ahmednagar with Christmas mail. Let≠ters, telegrams, cables have to he open≠ed, read and answered at once. A few cables to the West are to be sent on our way to Dadar where again at D.'s a new gathering of more people has been arranged. 

We stop at the cable office which is known as the very best business quarters for Bombay beggars. In fact, as soon as our car approaches the side≠walk, a very ragged old man steps forth. K., who is expert in finding the good souls among the worst of this erring tribe, recognizes the man and warns us not to give alms. Baba, who apparently never overhears anything, placidly turns towards K., and orders him to give the man three pies. K., handing the money to the man, says: "You have to use it right and not for drinking." Baba, watching the situation, again signals to K. to give the man another three pies. K., with best in≠tentions, tries to interfere and says: "Oh, he is no good; if you give that man clothes he will sell them to buy liquor. " Upon this Baba renews His order for the third time to give another three pies. The beggar most satisfied withdraws. At that Baha Himself makes a sign to the beggar to come back, and for the fourth time orders K. to give the man another three pies. The pies became the 

''

holy symbol  of mercy and love that works in realms unseen the purer benefit. The good ignorant man walks off no doubt thinking it was a profitable day. 

    The programme for the afternoon is to pay some visits to the poor and sick who have been anxiously awaiting Baba's holy visit. We are allowed to go with Him and share in the feast of compassion. 

* Continued from January 1939 issue. 



On our way home we stop at the apartment of a charming friend, S. P., the young Parsi woman whom I last saw at Baba's birthday celebration in Nasik and whom I cherish for her spiritual grace and simplicity. When Baba, walking through the long shady balcony, unexpectedly stood before her, she is overwhelmed with surprise and joy. All are asked to enter the living room to meet her mother who is a very gentle distinguished old lady. Baba takes the two women who are dear to His heart into a corner of the room, and with intense interest reviews their personal state of affairs. Meanwhile I take in the charm of this typical Indian home which reminds me so much of the habitations of Southern Russia. The walls are whitewashed, crude in style, the doors and windows made of wood ingeniously carved, chairs and easy-chairs and tables are leisurely placed here and there to serve the simplicity that creates facility in living. There is no luxury or accumulation of things without purpose for practical use. These people are much more free  than we are. They live with things but are much more aloof from things. 

    This evening Baba retires early. He wants us all to do the same, to rest before the night's journey to Nagpur the next day. 

    The following day 's work begins at 7-30 a. m. Innumerable interviews are given. At three o'clock in the afternoon, Baba decides to see Paul Muni 's film `Zola'. During the performance Baba is sitting in the dark. He seems to be totally absent. His form appears as if left empty, but no longer than it has to be; flashes of light make his eyes visible in the darkness. The perfor≠mance is over, and all of us enjoyed this marvelous work of intelligence and tragic human realism. Baba partici≠pating in our moods humorously remarks through His board: "Do not worry, it is merely a nightmare. " 

At 6-30 p. m. that same day, the 25th of December, we take the train for Nagpur. Again the station is crowded by the many who did not want to miss the rare occasion to see, once more, their Beloved Sadguru. 


    The ride to Nagpur is amusing. An excellent supper prepared ahead was served to us by K. and A., both in excellent humour making jokes and ending by singing spiritual hymns in choir with all the others. At 8-30 p. m. we are all ordered to sleep, huddled up between beds and garlands of flowers. It is the usual hour of 4-30 a. m. when Baba calls us to get up and to be ready for tea which will be obtained from the next station. 

Nagpur, 9ñ30 a. m.óThe train pulls in. There stands B. J., with his son E., and J. K., the High Judicial Official on duty in the Central Provinces, also Dr. D., a good friend of us all. This reception, without women, is matter-of≠fact, quick and executive. Even the garlands indescribable in beauty and richness in choice, placed around Baba's neck are quickly removed by Him as if there is no time to loose for sentimental ceremonies. Dr. D. hands over to Baba quick reports giving the programme for the three days stay in Nagpur. This time he requests to con≠tact the masses. Baba 's this visit to Nagpur is after eight years. 

B. J. drives Baba's car. Cheers are heard loud along the streets until we reach the beautiful house of red stone surrounded by an exquisitely styled garden filled with roses and jasmine in bloom. Women are waiting at the entrance of J. 's home. The women in this part of the world are supposed to guard the Holy Shrine, to perform the ritual and wait in patient devotion. B. 's wife and daughters are standing in the doorway, and immediately, as Baba enters, they throw their arms around their Beloved Guest. Then all pros≠trating their foreheads to His feet, per≠form the customary ritualóthe break≠ing of the cocoanutóthrowing flowers, spraying water to purify the path which leads into their home. All this, to me again, is an unusual sight and unusual experience. To us from the West any kind of ceremonies appears external and separating, since we have realized the intimate experience of the unique spiritual relationship which needs no more to express through rituals and ceremonies. Within, in our hearts, we never differ except through customs, habits and modes of thinking. Moved by the purity of their hearts we par≠ticipate in their symbolism with all sincerity. 



The J. family is a wonderful staunch group of individuals who have dedi≠cated the purpose of their lives to Baba. B., the head of the family, who is one of Baba's right hand men in Nagpur, said to me: "I love Baba more than anyone in my family. Although a father, I merely represent the head of a family of children of Baba. " B. is one of those men who live and die for their cause; reminds me of those ancient heroes that fought for the Holy Grave. When B. believes that he loves Baba more than his wife and children, he is fully aware of the responsibility of his statement; he loves his wife and children for their selves which is the part in Baba. The impersonal viewpoint guides his life, his home, his duties and his activities in civil service. These Parsis live a life of simple, natural dig≠nity. The wife cooks the meals and the immediate help is given by the daugh≠ters. Innumerable servants, who float around like birds, only do the lower manual work. 

Baba's bedroom, which is B.ís bed≠room, is situated in the left wing of the large central hall representing the formal living room in most of these Eastern houses. It forms a huge space, the inside built like a deep alcove protected against heat, with no direct windows. Two huge doors at either end provide the necessary draft. It is here where Baba's sacred Darshana is to be held during these three days. 

    The first day 's work begins. Baba enters the hall. He is welcomed by a simple and sincere greeting expressed by Dr. D., in a speech of welcome. Arti is then sung to His Holy Presence by all the members of the J.'s family and our party. Baba in divine humility accepts the dedication. He lends Himself to all religious rites. He accepts to have placed on his forehead the black powder and the haldi of the Hindus, and expects us, His disciples, to do the same. Love unselfish, service unselfish, are the pure expression of the true religion Shri Meher Baba practises in everyday life. These are the unique virtues He personifies. True religion is to live life spiritual; 



dedicating life to God unconditionally in mind, body and spirit. 

The first interview of the day is given to Sushila and her friend Vimala, two sweet Hindu students. They enter Baba's room in attitude of worship with folded hands. They offer Baba fruits and flowers and sing for Him a most beautiful ancient hymn in Sanskrit conveying the unfathomable faiths of all times. Sushila, the more beautiful of the two, I shall never forget. While drawing-in Baba's grace, the pupils of her eyes glide behind her lowering eyelids as if her whole life is diving in the ocean of Divine Bliss...Baba takes in the two souls at once and orders them to stay near Him and not to leave the house during the three days. 

    Another very interesting woman, a friend of Dr. D.'s wife, follows later. At first she is shy and, with uncertain attitude, stands outside of Baba's room waiting. The spiritual breeze that blows the warning in her heart is like storm. Although still very young she is a poetess of great renown in the Urdu language. Her  selfless divine dreams, which she expresses in unusual poetry, suffice to mark the indelible sign of her spiritual longing. Baba, who knows that the storm in her heart is beginning to express the purer want, drew her close. He made her realize the importance of the meeting. He offered Himself as the Great Chance of her life, demanding unconditional acceptance. She knew that it was time to give in. She pledged to loveóbut Him. She, too, remained close to Baba's room during the three days. 

Baba's next act of Mercy is the washing of the mad child. A special order had been sent, a long time ahead, for a child that in no way would be an ordinary child, but one of those types who have to consume in some con≠dition of madness their own spiritual evolution. The child, unusually shy, is a black-eyed Hindu boy of about seven years of age. Whenever the child saw Baba it jumped on His knees throwing its arms around Him. The reality of the holiness of the contact became proof in evidence. The child felt safe within Baba's embrace and 



rejoiced in the unfathomable fact of 

ë' 

nearness with loud cries and resonant laughter. Every-day this child, at the same hour, is bathed by Baba's own hands in the bathroom where Baba takes His daily ablutions. We all realize clearly that Baba is doing great spiritual reparation work, even if the miracle should remain unseen. Baba, doing the realization work within, can superview the path of any life throughout any phase. He can throw off in man all that encumbers the liberating process in evolution. These are His great unseen miracles. He governs sure, uncondi≠tional and pure ëwithin and above', the 'I', Life, Mind, Way. We so often see the most unexpected facts become realized to the bewilderment of those who, in no way, are expecting His Grace. The father of the child has been ordered to keep the child in the house day and night during Baba's stay in Nagpur and to bring it to "Meherabad" in April. The news spread as quick as fire that the God-man was to see anyone whose life was in despair, de≠fective,  destitute.  It  came  to be the alarm of Life itself. The crying need made all stirred and ready. Truth, when at the point to strike the designated hour, strikes fast and safe. Many child≠ren are brought who are apparently in the same state as the first child. It is evident that the first child was pre≠destined to find its way by creation order, that order which Baba sent forth, may be long ago, as He knows the soul He needs to draw. 

Most of the time we are allowed to stay in the room while Baba is giving interviews. This great privilege gives me the chance to gather notes on the most important facts. 

Baba's laconic language is the deep work that speaks in pure action; it is simple, but it has the power to control and form. One interesting incident happens at the meeting with a re≠nowned man of Nagpur, a professor of philosophy and comparative religion. Baba's attitude at the beginning was almost an aloofness which does not put the gentleman at ease. He feels shy at the apparently indifferent attitude of Baba. When 



the suspense reaches a certain point, Baba, summing the answer to all the questions, states: "A simple thing has been made difficult through ignorance. " Baba's word is Truth, Fact, that is action which forms and transforms. The man suddenly realizes 'the sense of Truth'; he apprehended deeper what philosophy and all the religions in theory had not been able to teach Him. After a moment of deeper recollection looking at Baba with the expression of a child that has well absorbed its lesson, he says: "Truth." To this Baba, with His unfathomable smile, gives the sign of affirmation. 

    A mute spectator is standing every moment of the day in a corner of Baba 's room untouched from facts and results that witnessed in awe during these strenuous working hours of Baba 's first day in Nagpur. He is Jal K., an intimate friend of the family whom we already met at the station. He seems to be lost in the Light that from the Divine Giver is pouring unending grace on all life that in those stirring hours displays its loud cry for liberation. He reminds me of the young monk in the stained  glass window of an ancient cathedral, in perpetual adoration before the image of God. 

It is 7-30 p. m. The doors are open for the impatient worshippers waiting outside. Hindus, Mahomedans, Parsis appearing in the most fantastic colourful costumes, kneeling, bowing, prostrating before the alive God is a spectacle I will never forgetómany in ragsóthose refused by social law and bound to consume by lower order of life their expiation. One day through the changing consciousness, these too will realize that life in ignorance is not unjust and only life unconscious is not safe. 

By passing His Holy hands over their anguished heads, touching the ill spots of their bodies, He gives to their being the unconditional order to awaken. God and His creature in love with each other, longing to join in divine bliss, perform the progress in Union. 

It is 11-30 p. m. Baba 's life, like the white lily floating on a mirror-like surface, becomes languorous in ac≠tion... It is the signal to end the labours of the day. 



ï 
