



The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern 
India and their Hagiology* 


THE LIFE OF SAINT ANDAL 

BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 

Of the twelve canonized Saints of the Southern Vaish≠navite Church there is the one blessed woman SaintóSaint Andal.

    It is a prevailing notion in the West that women in India have been treated worse than chattels, and that our sacred books sanction it. It is far from truth. The great law-giver Manu has laid down in his wonderful code that women should be respected. He says: 1 "If the husband does not please his wife, she being unhappy, the whole family is unhappy and miserable; but if the wife be quite contented with her husband, the whole family enjoys felicity." 2 "Let women be always res≠pected (pujya) by their fathers and brothers, by their husbands and the brothers of their hus≠bands; in other words, they should speak sweetly to them and provide them with good food, nice clothes and  orna≠ments, and thereby keep them happy. Those who seek great prosperity and happiness should never inflict pain on women." 3 "Where women are hon≠oured, in that family great men are born; but where they are not honoured, there all acts are fruitlessówhere women pass their days in misery and sorrow because of the misdeeds such as adultery of their husbands, that family soon entirely perishes, but where they are happy because of the good conduct of their husbands, the family continually prospers." 

The Upanishads say that the mother is a goddess. In the Sanskrit literature and all ver≠naculars that follow it, the name of the woman always comes before the man. It is Mata-Pita (mother-father), Sit a-Ram. (Sita is the wife and Ram is the husband. To say Ram-Sita is wrong.) This cer≠tainly proves beyond all 


doubt that our forefathers held women in great veneration. 

The life of Saint Andal is a most glorious one. Her birth is shrouded in mystery. Peri-Azhvar Chittar or Vishnu, our second Saint, who lived in Shri Villiputtur, had a flower garden. (This town is in Tinnevelly District, Southern India. It was a portion of the old Pandyan Kingdom.) This Saint grew the sacred tulasi, and offered it to God Al≠mighty. One day he was dig≠ging in his garden, when, to his great surprise, he found a beautiful child, just as King Janaka found Sita (vide the great epic Valmiki Ramayana). We also find such a story in Homer's Iliad about Erectheus. 

"Great Erectheus swayed, That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid. But from the teeming fur≠row took his birth, 

The mighty offspring of 

the foodful earth." 

The Saint took the holy child ad brought her up with much cae and affection. It is said that she was born in Kali 97, Nala year, Adi month, Purva-palguni asterism. This was aout 5000 years ago. 

The child was named "Goda". This slender-waisted and fasci≠nating child was certainly a divine one. 

Saint Vishnu-Chittar used to prepare daily beautiful wreaths of flowers and offer them to the idol Vata-patra-Sayin (name of the God). In the absence of the father the child Goda used to wear the wreaths intended for the Lord, and placing herself before a mirror used to admire her own beauty. One day she was caught red-handed, while she was wearing the wreath, and the father threw it away as unfit to be used by the Lord. It is said that the Lord appeared in his dream and said that He would have only the wreaths worn by his daughter, and that they were not desecrated but consecrated by her use. Our Saint rose in astonishment and carried to the temple, from that date forward, only wreaths worn by his daughter whom he considered as the Goddess Lakshmi. From that day Andal was called Sudik-Kodutha Nachiyar mean≠ing the queen that wore and gave garlands. 

We now understand what is meant by Motherhood of God and Fatherhood of God. 



One great bhakta said, refer≠ring to God, "As Father, He is the Judge; as Mother, He is the Forgiver." In the Bhagavad≠gita, Lord Shri Krishna calls Himself Mother. B. B. Nagar≠kar, in his speech delivered in the Chicago Parliament of Religions, explained clearly this aspect of the question thus: "The first ideal of the Brahma Samaj is the ideal of the Motherhood of God The world has yet to understand and real≠ize, as it never has in the past, the tender and loving relation≠ship that exists between man≠kind and their supreme Univer≠sal Divine Mother. O! what a world of thought and feeling is centred in that one mono≠syllable word `Ma ' (Mother)... Words cannot des-cribe, hearts cannot conceive of the tender and self-sacri-ficing love of a human mother. Of all human relations, that of the mother to her children is the most sacred and elevating relation, and yet our frail and fickle human mother is nothing in compari≠son with the Divine Mother of the entire humanity who is the primal source of all Love, all Mercy and all Purity. " This beautiful spiritual aspect was 

clearly explained in his own inimitable way by the late Yogi Partha-sarathy Aiyangar thus: "The Universal Mother Lak≠shmi, the Shakti or the personal energy of Vishnu (the latter identified with Supreme Deity) is Lady and Goddess of the worlds, and the mediatrix between God and the soul. She checks sin and stirs up Divine Mercy and Love for sinners. In her incarnation as Sita, the bride of Ram, she is especially to be venerated as our Lady of Grace and Mercy. She is the Beloved of the Lord Incarnate in Ram. She converts the soul by her Mercy and the Lord by her Beauty." The same idea is put in terse words by F. R. de Sales: "Strength (Father) is tempered by sweetness (Moth≠er) and sweetness is supported by strength. One stimulates and the other persuades."

    The Mother (Lakshmi called Shri) resides in the bosom of the Lord, like Christ the son, in His bosom (John 1. 18). Sage Lokacharya described Lakshmi who represents the Motherhood aspect of the Lord thus: "She is like the Mother 


who could not leave the cradle of the children on the one side, nor the bed of the Lord on the other side. " This means that she comforts the souls on the one hand, and pleads for them with the Lord on the other. 

St. Andal was the incarna≠tion of Lakshmi herself. The Lord could not be without her, and she could not be without Him. She came here to redeem the world. It is only Loveó love that of a motheróthat can redeem the world. It was why it was said that St. Andal's power of salvation exceeded that of the Lord. 

St. Andal became Godó Love-sick; she was pining to wed the Lord. St. Peri Azhwar was in a fix. He did not know who, among the mortals, was fit to be her husband. He was like Janaka.

    "The father knowing how I came, No daughter of a mortal dame, In all the regions failed to see A bridegroom meet to match with me." 

He broached the subject to her, his darling daughter. She would not wed any man but her Lord; she consecrated her≠self to His service. The Father≠hood of God becomes complete only with His Motherhood. St. Andal would wed Him whom she described thus: ó

 "Judge ye, the beauteous locks and looks And fruit-red lips, my 

Rang-Nectars. " óThe Ranganatha Swami of Shrirangham (on the river Kav≠eri in Trichinopally District.) It is said that Vishnu-Chittar had a vision divine, when the Lord agreed to wed his daughter. Azhvar became delighted, and took his holy daughter to Shri≠rangham. There she became one with her Lord, the God. The father was directed to go to his own town, Shri Villi≠puttur, and do the Lord's work. Such is the story of the won≠derful incarnation of St. Andal.

     "Hail Goda sweet; for all immortal time Be blessed thou, who roused of yore In melting strainsóthe Vedas' deeper sense, That soul of ours, for Him and His For ever areóa lovely wreath of lays, 



Which when He wokeó Shri Krishna sweet From beauteous sleep on Nila's breasted slopes, 

Did chain him fast 

in links of gold. " OM: Blessed be St. Andal. 

