 
Lectures Delivered in Mysore and Bangalore
By EASTERN AND WESTERN DISCIPLES OF MEHER BABA

 
INTRODUCTORY SPEECH IN MYSORE
ON  being  called  by  the   Chair-
man, Mr. A. Subramania Iyer, B.A., Retired Excise Com- missioner in Mysore State, to introduce the illustrious speakers of the day, Acharya M. Chakrawarthi, M.A. (Hons.), of Mallur, an exponent and lecturer in Vedanta philosophy, addressed the gathering as follows:
The great and signal honour of introducing the distinguished lecturers of this evening has been given to me and I hope I shall discharge this duty befitting the occasion. Incidentally, I have to speak to this august assembly about the great Guru (Master) Shri Meher Baba, one of the foremost Saints of modern India and the silent spiritual luminary shedding the greatest  Divine lustre all the world over in spite of the modern materialistic ten- dencies and proensities char- acterising most of the civilized life to-day. Shri Meher Baba has spiritually blended the best of the East and the best of the West in his own august personality. He
 
has been observing silence  for  the last thirteen years, which is in itself a standing commentary on his hallowed life and sacred teachings.
He was given his first spiritual experience of the Superconscious State by Hazrat Babajan of Poona and was later brought down to normal consciousness by his  second Master, Shri Upasani Maharaj of Sakori, Ahmednagar District, Deccan, which has produced a succession of siddha- purushas (Perfect Masters) in modern times. Shri Meher Baba  has almost eclipsed his great Gurus in his spiritual ascent. The genial personality, the lustrous face and the ever-charming smile and the silent but the most dynamic expression and gestures add really a divine hallow to his presence and whoever  is fortunate to get his gracious interview cannot but carry a life- long memory of the great Teacher. Indeed, Shri   Meher Baba crowns the list of all modern saints. His will is so  strong  and  his love is so contagious that  once we see him  we
 

 
are drawn to him, perhaps for ever. Through the kind offices of an intimate friend and Gita student of mine, it was given me to  know Shri Meher Baba more intimately and I am eagerly looking for the moment when the spiritual uplift of humanity will be a solid fact under the ægis of Shri Meher Baba. When the world is darkest and mankind is eagerly expecting a Saviour from the terrible drift that is seen everywhere, it has perhaps pleased God the Almighty to send to our model state of Mysore, Shri Meher Baba who now works from Mysore for the spiritual uplift of humanity.	All	glory	to		His Highness the Maharaja of Mysore, our	modern	Janaka  (the	God- realized king and father of  Sita) and his trusted Dewan Amin-ul- Mulk Sir Mirza M. Ismail, who have sponsored this  great  Cause of humanity and have crowned all their		progressive		measures		in economic,	social		and	national uplift in their State with a great attachment and interest to this spiritual enterprise of Shri Meher Baba and are eagerly looking for the day when the greatest savants of the world shall discuss the Essentials of a Universal Religion here in Mysore State at the Meher Baba Universal Spiritual Centre at Byramangala, near Bidadi.
I shall now pass on to the
 
speakers of the evening. First  I will speak about Princess Norina Matchabelli. To	revive	spiritual pantomimes of performing relig- ious spectacles at Christmas times, the greatest European theatrical producer,	Prof.	Max	Reinhardt created	the		world-famous	play "The Miracle", and after going in search throughout Europe for a "Madona"		who		was		not	a professional actress, when he saw the young princess, he chose her for	her		imminent	spiritual qualities and for her Italian type to personify the Mother of Christ.
During these performances which she played over a thousand times in Europe and Ameriea, she actually had her first spiritual initiation through experience which gave to the performance  the unique quality for which she became world renowned.
Through her unusual creative and artistic talents, she inspired many artists and several stars of the stage and screen have passed under her training.
She had taken part in various public and civic activities. She lived an active international life as the wife of a Diplomat, and the most unusual task for a woman's career was when she in her later years became the active president of a great industrial concern founded by her late husband in New York.
 

 
Before she met Shri Meher Baba, although immersed in wordly life, deep down within, she remained the earnest  seeker of truth and approached the greatest teachers of our time for spiritual enlightenment. Only after coming in contact with Shri Meher Baba, her life took a definite turn which made her forsake the wordly life to be free to follow him. The decisive spiritual transformation was brought about by the Master who became the supremest experience of her life which she wishes all true aspirants to share with her and to realise. To-day she lives as his disciple at his command wherever he is.
Introducing Countess Nadine Tolstoy, he said: Countess Tolstoy had university education, and she has been particularly interested in spiritual philosophy of the East which led her to contact Eastern Yogis in the Weat and she actually practised different yoga methods which naturally created in her an extreme need and desire to come in contact with a Perfect Master, the importance of which all spiritual aspirants can very well realise. This unique exper- ience came to her through her contact with Meher Baba in  whom she recognized the true guide and found her life's most cherished desire for spiritual enlightenment fulfilled. Through personal experience she is
 
convinced that Meher Baba is the Perfect Master, in  whose guidance she has been ever since she first came in his contact in America in 1931. She has also been to the Master's Spiritual Retreat at Nasik in 1936 and has ever since been with him.
During her stay and personal training under Shri  Meher  Baba at his Meherabad Ashram near Ahmednagar, she was in  charge of a free hospital for the poor which offered her most natural conditions of a school for train- ing into loving and selfless services to humanity.
Her late husband—Count Ilya Tolstoy—was the son of the great Russian philosopher Count Leo Tolstoy. When he first met Shri Meher Baba in America, he said "it is for the first time in my life that I met a man who has divine love". This contact and exper- ience led to his great spiritual un- foldment and transformation before his death through the personal grace of Shri Meher Baba.
She has been in America for about twenty years where she  first met Shri Meher Baba. She is a great lover of India and her spiritual lore, and feels in great affinity with spiritual India.
Speaking about Dr. C. D. Deshmukh, M.A., Ph.D. (London), Mr. Chakrawarthi said that Dr. Deshmukh is a Professor in
 

 
philosophy in Nagpur University and his thesis on "The Problem  of Individuality" got him his doctorate from the University of London. He has owned Shri Meher Baba as his great Gurudev (Master) and is convinced that Shri Meher Baba is the Perfect Master of the age. He is sure that a new chapter in world’s history on a spiritual basis will be ushered in as soon as Shri  Meher

Baba,	breaks	his	silence	and
blesses	mankind	with	his
message.
Concluding	his	speech,	he
remarked that it was for the gathering now to listen, to judge and assimilate the great  truths  that these illustrious lecturers speak about to-night and get blessed by coming  in  contact with such practical experiences as theirs.
SYNOPSIS OF LECTURES
Dr. C. D. Deshmukh, M.A., Ph.D. (London), lecturer in Philosophy at the Nagpur Uni- versity, said: "We are passing through an unparalleled spiritual crisis. Materialism is rampant and the transitory joys are considered the be all and end all of life; and the younger generation as a  whole is losing faith in religion. Though there have been periods of ignorance concerning spiritual life, never before was it so aggressive, nor did it take the robe of reason as it does to-day.
 
People are going away from religion and seeking light from  the sciences, and they end by becoming atheists. Their know- ledge is no better than what can  be called inspired ignorance.
Science has its own place in life. It has given us wonderful things. It tells us of the laws of nature and the universe. But it is only a means for realization of ends and it cannot tell us  what life in this planet is meant for.
The great German poet and philosopher Goethe died with the words "More Light" in his 1ips. The mere intellectual pursuit of science is not going to satisfy the human longing for inner light, to find something stable and eternal. In short, God is a matter of direct experience and cannot be proved intellectually.
The next question therefore is, wherefrom are we going to get that light for which we are all longing? There can be no sure guidance for humanity except through the Truth contacted and through great religious exper- ience which is first-hand and which is free from all the inessentials of rituals or dogmas. If to-day this light is to come, it has to come from Masters of Wisdom.
In Sadguru Shri Meher Baba we have got a Master who speaks with the authority of one who knows the ultimate
 

 
goal of life from personal experience. He appeals to something far deeper than the intellect. It is not by mere talk of love, but by the release of actual love that a real brotherhood of humanity can be established. This needs such an awakening as can be effected only by a Perfect Master and Shri Meher Baba can awaken us by his divine love and understanding."
Dr. Deshmukh also remarked that it was very curious that those who were spiritually minded somehow came together and instanced how Countess Nadine Tolstoy and Princess Norina Ma.tchabelli became followers of the great Guru and are inmates of his Ashram first at Nasik, then at Meherabad, Ahmednagar, and now with him in Bangalore. He concluded that humanity would get light not from pompous lectures and messages, etc., but from the spiritual experiences of Shri Meher Baba, who  has himself been observing silence  for the last thirteen years, and  who does not believe in such spectacular things.
Countess Nadine Tolstoy, who followed, addressed the audiences and declared that the practice of certain Yogic methods eventually led her to Shri Meher Baba, and  in him she found the Yoga of Truth, Faith and Oneness and God.   His  perfect   guidance has
 
awakened in her the pure spiritual vision of the living Truth which is attainable only through the elimination of the ego.
Great seekers after Truth have failed because they had no proper guide, and to-day we want a Ram, a Krishna,. a Buddha, a Zoroaster, a Mohammed, a Jesus, etc. Life,  in Meher Ashram under the guidance of Shri Meher Baba is the true school of spirituality, and he is at once the Lord and servant of man. He reveals by his shining example the meaning of the realization of the One Life in all its aspects and manifestations. He has come to help humanity for the sake of love and truth, and in his presence one feels as if clouds of distrust and doubt and impurity are removed.
"In all our tours through India I have had an opportunity to  see her great saints well-known in their respective places and I  found that in Baba they recog- nized God the Beloved. Shri Meher Baba is the greatest Master of the age and we bring his name to you as the highest lesson in life."
Princess Norina Matchabelli be- gan by quoting the Master's own motto which best explains  the  true nature of his working: ''I  have come not to teach but to awaken". By the divine love that flows continuously through him he transforms the  consciousness of the
 



individuals who come to him for liberation that they may know through experience what the philosophers of all times have tried theoretically to teach. Only the Perfect Master who is veritable incarnation of 1ove divine, can awaken in the individual the fire of love that consumes in its flames the lesser desire of mind, body and world all of which must be relinquished before we can attain Perfection.
Shri Meher Baba says: "The highest human love is not the highest Absolute Love. The  divine love is the highest aspect of the all-pervading love. One who gets love gets God. The divine love is beyond reason and intellect. Nobody can create this highest aspect of love in himself. The divine love is given and not created It is a grace from the Godman.
It is the real side of  religion and the only element which reveals or unfolds the  emotionality of the spiritual path. The highest love is the one which is perfectly selfless and disinterested, devoid  of  all desires and expectations. It is fire—an infinite fire in itself and those who burn in it get purified.
Philosophies and intellectual gymnastics make one intellect- ually certain about the existence of God but it is only the love for God, the divine love
 

that enables one to find Him, to feel Him and become One with Him."
We must first fall in love with God then will we be given  to  love man that is, "to love one another". This is indeed the highest demonstration of the fulfilment of the divine theme. Shri Meher Baba makes us  realize the truth. He makes us realize Oneness in Manyness. He makes us realize that spirit and matter, spiritual life and material life go hand in hand. He says: "When head and heart, intellect and feeling are equally developed and balanced, then the apparent antithesis is resolved into One Divine consciousness. He has not come to make man different but  to draw man back to the divine source. Through his example he will help man to find real happiness and liberation  within  in which man is free from prejudices  and  unattached   to life and its play through the opposites.
Renunciation should be men- tal. Man should be in the world, perform his legitimate duties but feel mentally free, detached from everything. The new citizen of  the world should be in the world but not of the world.
In the conclusion the lecturer referred to the idea of Shri Meher Baba to establish the new Univ- ersal Spiritual
 

 
Centre comprising the following six departments: (1) The Spiri- tua1 Academy; (2) The House of Advanced Souls; (3) The Abode of the Saints; (4) The Mad (Mast) Institute; (5) The Solitary Quar- ters for Meditation, and (6) The Resting Place for the Afflicted, explaining	the		object	of	each section.	This	Spiritual		Centre shall be the training ground for selfless workers who will learn how to render real and effective service to mankind.
Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff, pre- senting a study of Meher Baba from the Muslim viewpoint, said: ''Orthodoxy, in the history of the world has always opposed the advent of a spiritual Master and that evidently for two reasons: Firstly		any	new		dispensation spells a possible danger to all vested interests and instinctively they try to safeguard them by an opposition	right		or	worng. Secondly, possessing as it does a traditional rather than a rational attitude towards religion, ortho- doxy fears damnation of soul and the wrath of the powers that be, by listening to anything new. Islam is no better in this respect than	others	in	spite	of	the teaching of the Prophet 'Seek ye the Light of Knowledge (Divine) even if it were to be found in China '.''
Leaving churchianity (conser- vatism) alone which is not
 
equal to this new task he appealed to the intellectuals to study the life and teachings of Hazrat Meher Baba in the light of the highest Sufistic philo- sophy. Dr. Ghani further said, "Meher Baba is nothing if not a Sufi, when he lays stress on love and he (Meher Baba) attributes the quality production of saints in Islam mainly due to love being their chief method of approach to divinity.
Meher Baba's teachings and claims are not in conflict  with  the basic principles of any religion and his apparent in- formality is the index of the time—the present Qalandari age characterised by irreligiosity. He is just what the world  needs  at the moment, the common denom- inator who can be approached  and claimed by all without loss of prestige cultural or religious. Does it not sound like a Mujaddid (revivalist) of Islam speaking through him when Meher Baba says: 'I have come not  to  teach but to awaken'?"
PRESIDENTIAL REMARKS
Mr. A. Subramania Iyer who presided at the Mysore Lectures, welcomed the idea of the Master—Shri Meher Baba—in- augurating his spiritual activities in the Mysore State by establishing the Universal Spir- itual Centre at Byramangala. This, he said, is in keeping
 
 
with the high tradition of this State in being hospitable to great Masters in the past. He also paid a special	tribute	to	the	Western disciples who were the speakers of the evening with Dr. Deshmukh. Rukn-ul-Mulk	S.	Abdul	Wajid who   presided   at   the Bangalore
Lectures, read out Hazrat Meher Baba's own statement from a booklet that he has not
 
come to form a new sect or a new religion but to use religion to realize Divinity.
He ended the evening function by referring to the inspired speeches saying—"It is indeed an index of the greatness of the influence of the Master when the disciples are able to impart their sincere faith and devotion in such feeling terms.''
