


Shri Meher Babaís Teaching as the 
Kernel of Upanishadic Wisdom 


BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A., PH. D. 

Of the Bhagwadgita it is said that its teaching is the m ilk gathered from the cows in th e form of the Upanisha ds. We can also say abo ut Shri Meher Baba's teaching, that it represents the kernel of Upanishadic wisdom . Shri Meher Baba is the Ancient One and his teaching reveals the Tru th which is as old as the cosm os. The spiritual wis≠dom which he brings has had its echoes even in the hoary past of the Upan≠ishadic times. The supe rficial trend in modernism would seem to require that the Truth should be new. But Truth does not change from time to time like the fashions of the day. The unspeak≠able grandeur with which it is hallo wed does not fade with the rolling of years. That which is eternal cannot becom e stale with tim e. In Shri Meher Baba' s teaching the kernel o f the ancient wisdom of the Upanishads is being presented to the world again, with di-vine authority. 

    India is a land of philosophers and seers, and the place of the Upanish ads in Indian philosophy is unique. F rom the historical point of view the brilliant and imposing systems of the later periods had their roo ts in th e Upani≠shads, and almost all of them derive their inspiration from the wisdom treasured in them . The important position which the Upanishads have in Indian philosophy an d also in the philosophical thought of the world is due to the fact that they are a fruit of an age which is vib rant with the m ost earnest and critical search for the Truth. They are not the product of ar m-chair speculation. The sages and the seers of the Upanishads are wrestling with problems which are as real to them as the problem of bread is to the masses in modern times. We have striking ex≠amples of wisdom -loving kings like Janak who were willing to sacrifice all their possessions for the sake of the highest knowledge. Even ladies had caught the enthusiasm for philosophy as is shown by the ex≠ample of Gargi and Maitreyee. Further the spirit of the pe riod is not dogmatic but rational. No philosopher could hope to receive recognition or becom e pre≠eminent without answ ering the criti≠cism of rival thinkers. He had to give the exposition of his views in assem ≠blies which were re sonant with k een controversies. 



The Upanishadic thinkers have seriously tried all the avenues of the Truth. There are questions which can≠not be conclusively decided except by means of t he scientific m ethod. For example, knowledge about pre-exis≠tence or re-incarnation, or about the conditions of existe nce in life after death, can be based, not on speculation, but on direct inform ation or inference from the fa cts of experience. In this connection the m ethod of psychical research which is es sentially scientific in spirit was not unknown to the U pan≠ishadic thinkers. Attempt to establish contact with the other world through mediums is re ferred to in the Brihad≠aranyaka in the story of the lady possessed by a Gandharva. 

Such problems were attacked through the scientific m ethod. For many persons, accep tance of the testimony of experts can be the only available method in certain fields. As Shri Meher Baba once told his dis≠ciples, the knowledge of the hidden side of life has to be gathered by "believing those who know the secrets of life and death". U nless there is a general unfoldment of occult powers, the testimony of experts will have to be accepted as the best scien tific data available. 

While problems of the nature and the laws of the other world are to be tackled through the scientific m ethod, there are many m etaphysical and onto≠logical problems which require to be approached through methods which are essentially philosophic. In Upanishads, these important problems are attacked along four distinct lines: (1) S pec≠ulative, (2) Ethical, (3) Psychological and (4) Religious. 

There are two main speculative queries in the Upanishadic literature: (1) What is the inner most principle in man? (2) What is the ulti≠mate nature of Reality? With regard to the first qu ery they so on came to the conclusion that the soul is neither the body nor the m ind but som e principle which transcends both. Those who in modern psychology identify the soul with the m ind will be star tled by the penetration of their initial question, "By whose inspiration does the incited mind go to its object?" (Kena). And in reply to this question the ultimate principle in human life is descri bed as "som ething which is incomprehensible to the mind but which at the sam e time compre≠hends the m ind". (Kena). The second query was about that prim ary and unitary principle of the cosm os by knowing which everything else w hich is not known becom es known , just as by knowing the earth in one earthen pot we know the essence of all the earthen pots, since earth is the only true sub≠stance, and its various forms are merely distinctions of speech . (Chandogya). The conclusion of the second query that the "pure being alone existed in the beginning, one without the second", and that the world with its multiplicity and differentiation came into existence because "it desired to c reate itself and become many". ( Chandogya). The source of individuation is thus not to be found in any other foreign principle. It is in the original principle itself.



    The next important question which naturally confronted the Upanishadic thinkers was, "What exactly is the relation of this cosm ic principle to the innermost principle in m an?" And it is at this point that they have taken the boldest and the m ost unique step of identifying the two principles. "O child! All creations are roote d in the Tr uth. The Truth is their hom e and in the Truth they abide. That Truth, that Atman thou artóO Swetaketo!" (Chan≠dogya). This basic Truth is given to the world in a new for m when Shri Meher Baba proclaims that "you not only possess but actually are Soul, which is but one Param atman", or when he declares that "to realize the Supreme Being as your own self is to realize the Truth" .* 

The question of explaining 



the nature of the identity between the individual soul and Universal Atm an is not capable of be ing tackled through the intellect alone. At this critic al point the Upanishadic sages deliberately give up ratiocination, and have no shadow of regret in doing so. The hum an soul seems to have a separate and self-sufficient unity and independence of its own. How exactly is it m erged or swal≠lowed up in the Abso lute? Here the Upanishadic thinkers openly and clearly give up the attempt to explain the fact b y means of ratiocin ative thought. All that we get from them as an aid to our im agination is a f ew brilliant analogies. Just as all th e juices of flowers lose their distinc tiveness in the honey stored by the bees in the honey-comb, and the rivers have no separate existence when they pour themselves in the o cean, the creatures in the Absolute can have no private and limited self-consciousness. And this all devouring Absolute Truth is not merely transcendent or isolated from the creation, but is imm anent in it like the vital juice which nourishes the leaves, the branches, the fruit and the flo wers of a living tree, or like the salt  when dissolved in water pervades it in all the parts. (Chandogya). 

    The Upanishads clearly and openly recognize that there are many inevitable and insuperable difficulties in the atte≠mpt to und erstand the Infinite Atman through the m ind. Shri Meher B aba brings out this point unambiguously when he says "intellect is the lowes t form of understandingÖ", and that therefore ìyou must surrender yourself to a Sadguru if you want G od≠realization."Ü We find this doctrine anticipated by the Up anishadic seer when he says, "This knowledge cannot be obtained through reasoning. O be≠loved one! Only when it is told by another is it really understood." (Katha). The master of wisdom is thus indispensable for arriving at this supreme understanding. Hence the clarion call of the sages is, "Arise! Awaken! Obtain understanding by approaching the Supreme Teachers!" The wise m en say that "the Path is difficult like walking on the edge of a knife". (Katha).

    Before, however, the disciple can derive any benefit from the Master, he has to undergo 



certain moral discipline. As emphasised by Shri Meher Baba, the way to realization is "from God to God".* The Upanishadic sages also required m oral preparation of the aspirant before they considered him fit for highest know≠ledge. At tim es they enjoined c elibacy as a precondition of the suprem e knowledge of the Atman. Som etimes moral precepts are given to th e disci≠ples, e. g., "Speak the truth. Follow religion. Do not be negligent in your studies." (Taittiriya). This was th eir clear commandment. A high degree of moral attainment is, according to th em, absolutely necessary to m ake a person fit for receiving the knowledge of the Atman. Thus in Katha Upanishad the god of Death tests Nachiketas by making him tempting offers, and c on≠gratulates him for choosing the good in preference to the tem pting; and says, "The courageous one accepts the good rather than the tempting." (Katha). 

The moral life in itself is not sufficient. It has to be further supple≠mented by a life of psychological disci≠pline and religious devotion. In his dis- course on repeating God 's name Shri Meher Baba says, "C oncentrate your mind on the repetition alone, and breathe regularly while doing so." He often indicates for his disciples dif≠ferent forms of m editation, and in his pamphlet on "Meditation" recommends concentration on "the m ere form of a God-man, or some simple formula such as 'I am neither sharir (gross body) nor prana (the subtle body which is the seat of desires and vital forces), nor manas (mental body which is the seat of the mind): I am Atman (Soul)' ". 

This emphasis on the need for a life of meditation and co nstant search is prominent in the Upa nishadic philo≠sophy as will be seen from the en≠joinment, "The Atman should be seen, heard of, thought and m editated upon." (Brihadaranyaka). The psychological discipline is not to be looked upon as a kind of mechanical psychic exercise on the analogy of physical exercise which is wholesome for physical culture, but it is meant to bring out and illumine the hidden possibilities in the hum an hearts. Thus we are gradually 



Led to the life of religion as a necessary For the other approaches to the truth. supplement. 

(to be continued) 