

.  







Existence 

By F. B. WORKINGBOXWALLA 

It is as inconstant as the mind. Though limited, it is limitless, in that it is without beginning and without end. It is limited in the sense that mind is limited. That which is impermanent and subject to change is limited; and mind, with its limitless thoughts, has but a limited vision. Its infinity of thoughts may make it fly from one thing to another, but it cannot make it under≠stand the reality of existence. Intellect is but a tiny, evolved particle of the mind, and if, with its discoveries and destructiveness, it claims to be the solvent of anything and everything, it is sorely mistaken. It has, of course, its own part to play in the scheme of things, which it does with more of mess and less of logic. But that is beside the point. 

To a mind regularly given to trying to understand it, the existence looks to be a funny thing. Tragedies and come≠dies are intermingled, and, though in fact, misery and suffering outweigh happiness, on the whole, it strikes one that this phenomenon, this ephemera of a universe, is a big hotchpotch! Were it not for that, were it not for its ever-changing aspect, the creation would have been very, very monotonous in≠deed! And where would then have been the Lord 's leela, His play? It is because of this duality, this multiplicity into infinity that, though fickle, the exis≠tence is said to be without beginning or end. This does not imply that it is everlasting. Everlasting is only the truth pervading this existence. 

It is wonder whether it was with any definite, settled purpose that the creation beganówhether it began or cropped up like mushrooms in wet days! It needs no stretching of the imagination to understand that this unintelligible "something" (or nothing?) itself denotes that it must be the outcome of nothing in particular. But then we have the Biblical version to the effect that God took seven days to bring crea≠


tion into being, which means that He  tendency to be noticed in nature is the  

the Almighty first played the Architect  maintaining of its equilibrium. If earth≠ 

(but He does not appear to be a very  quakes take place, floods over-run vast  

able Architect!), and took a period of  expanse of land, pestilence and disease  

time to shape and mould this stupen≠ take their toll, wars spread death and  

dous enormity which, nevertheless, is a  desolation, it is because of nature purg≠ 

mere atom in the indeterminable, invis≠ ing itself of some chronic disorders in  

ible planetary systems! But perhaps the  it. May be, it is God asserting Himself!  

Old Testament is allegorical in its  With all that, to put it in simple par- 

interpretation.  lance, this existence is an indescribably  

Anyway, it is a good mental exercise  grand mix-up with all the inherent  

to weigh the pros and cons. True, there  changeability on an indefinite scale. At  

is regularity in nature; for we have the  this deduction, the mind is at a stand- 

seasons, the ebb and flow, night and  still; nevertheless, since existence is  

day. But the rains are irregular; they are  there, it is inclined to the belief that  

heaviest in one and scarce in another  beneath this apparent inconsistency,  

place. They come down anywhere, any  there is One Ultimate Purpose, and that  

time in the year, with or without their  is, preparation for a Better Life! 

accustomed fury; the flux and reflux      However it be, the fact remains that  

are never to time; the sun is never seen  we are too much engrossed in and  

rising only in one direction all the year  enamoured of our false surroundings.  

round, and its rising and setting vary;  That is funny in itself; but funniest of  

the proverbially inconstant moon of  all is that mind, which constantly  

Shakespeare does not seem to have  hankers after change, detests and fears  

mended its ways! All this goes to show  most one changeóleaving this medley  

that both regularity and irregularity  of existence! If at all the mind is cons- 

exist in nature. But the one marked  tant, faithful to one idea, it is to the idea  

of Life! Or Life unto Death!  