JULY 
The Master remained in Meherabad during the month, but ordered preparations to be made for a move by the end of July to Jubbulpore for a long stay. 
VISITORS 
The news of Baba going to a distant place for starting a Centre and His absence from Meherabad for a long time caused no small concern to 
His disciples and devotees on this side, who had been accustomed .to come over to Him especially in times of need. As the date for His leaving Meherabad drew nearer, they came in numbers to see the Master and have His darshana, advice and blessings before He left. 
Among the visitors was a well-known educationalist, who came to see Baba as a 

representative of one of the greatest political leaders of India on an important mission of a private nature. He came with a friend. Both were spiritually-inclined, and the Master was pleased to meet them. They had a private talk with Baba, who also gave them a few words in His usual manner on the board, about true spirituality, faith, longing, love and selfless service. What impression they had of the Master is not for me to relate. Perhaps they may themselves speak of it some day. 
A group of young Parsi grad­uates and college students from Bombay, who were spiritual aspir­ants and practised namasmarana (concentration on the names of God) since a long time, also came to meet the Master during the last week of July. They had read and known about Baba, and were anxious to see Him in person. They took this opportunity of meeting Him before He left for Jubbulpore, and of having His advice and guidance in certain procedure they were practising. Baba was very happy to meet them, especially for their spiritual aspirations and craving for an advance­ment on the Path, which modern educated youth sadly lacks. They had read and were well aware of the inestimable privilege of coming under the graceful guidance of a guru, but had not yet come in contact with a living Master. Their joy at meeting a living Master in Baba could, therefore, be well imagined. They were all given special interviews individually, and were also advised certain spiritual practices. Perhaps, in times to come, our readers will come to know of their impressions and experiences. 
THE CENTRE PLAN 
1 AT MANDLA The move of the Master .and his group from Meherabad to the Central Provinces was in connection with the arrangements for establishing a Centre at Mandla, about 70 miles from Jubbulpore, situated on the Narbada, where a hundred acres of land were gifted to Him by one of the wealthy malguzars of that side. The Master accepted the offer which was made unasked and with a depth of feeling of love and devotion that He alone could see and appreciate. Besides, that particular region 

along the banks of the river Narbada had a sanctity of its own, because of a number of rishis (ascetics) and holy men having lived and practised penances there in times of old. It had, therefore, a spiritual atmosphere helpful for the spiritual work the Master wanted to do and which he felt during his few moments' stay on that particular spot offered to him. Here still stand about two thousand out of a lac (hundred thousand) of the mango trees purposely planted by the rishis of old and which gave that spot the name of "lakh ambe", i.e., the abode of a lac of mango trees. 
The acceptance of this offer by the Master naturally created a great stir on that side, and material and spiritual speculations started forth­with. Some actually commenced profiteering by raising the prices of their lands and also of the materials required for the building of such a huge Centre as intended, while others, spiritually inclined and truly in need of the invaluable help and guidance of a spiritual Master, rejoiced over the benefits of His august presence and the help that the ideal spiritual ashram (Centre) would offer to spiritual aspirants from all over. But when spirituality is to be made practical, which is Baba's first and most important injunction, and when Masters of spiritual perfection themselves descend to this material world of ours to destroy materialism, to live and work amongst the masses of humanity, they use material means, and work in the way of the world. Baba has explained: "I use maya to pull you out of maya." Thus it has been in all times as in ours. In spite of all the spiritually ideal conditions of a place like Mandla and of the great enthusiasm and spirit of co­operation offered by the people, there was one very important material consideration that presen­ted a serious handicap. It was the isolation and long distance of the spot from an important city and railway junction like Jubbulpore, which was an essential consider­ation in the practical working of the huge Centre that was to inhabit hundreds of lives, including a large number of foreigners who are expected to come over from all parts of the world. To make such an isolated spot 

habitable and tend to the daily necessities of these hundreds of lives, presented a problem that required some consideration. Not that it was impossible but because of its impracticably isolated situation, that would cause so much unnecessary wastage of time, labour and money which could be be much better utilised elsewhere towards the development of the colony in general. 
Much as the Master liked the spot for its spiritually ideal atmos­phere and for the spontaneous spirit and love with which it was offered, and much as his immediate group also wished to work it up whole­heartedly, the practical side of the problem always made them apprehensive. Despite the obvious difficulties presented, and the fact that Jubbulpore and Mandla had just recently been deluged by unusual floods, Baba wanted to go to Jubbulpore again with the whole group, to stay there and try as best as all could to make this scheme practicable. And in abject submission to the Master's will, the group made all preparations to go there. Uptil the end of the month, all had Jubbulpore in their minds 
as the next move of the Master. 
AUGUST 
2 MYSORE 
There was, however, an atmo­sphere of uncertainty prevailing. A certain event on the 30th of July suddenly changed the situation, and gave the mandali one of those typical surprises of a "change in plans'' with which the Master's group and even the outside world now seem to be well acquainted and familiar. Jubbulpore was cancelled, and Mysore was named as the next move. Names do not matter, but the significant change in an absolutely opposite direction from the North to the South and the surprising quickness with which it came, kept all minds in excitement as to what would come next. 
To travel with a party of over 50, including men and women both Eastern and Western, by road, in a car and a big bus, with dangerous crossings of a number of rivers and innumerable nallas (streamlets) without bridges, in these rainy days, involves a risk of being helplessly held up or swept away in treach­erous currents of rivers. It is a task under­

taken unconcernedly only by Mas­ters and their groups who are utterly indifferent to the hardships of travel under such tying conditions. 
THE SOUTHWARD MARCH 
Precisely on the day and hour fixed, Baba left Meherabad with his group for Sholapur which was their first halt. It may as well be men­tioned here that the entire party was moving towards a very distant place. This change was decided upon just two days before, and no previous arrangements of any sort were made for such a big party's stay, except that an emissary was sent to Mysore only two days in advance by train. To find quarters suitable to the peculiar requirements of our group with its very rigid restrictions, which are very difficult to observe, especially in foreign places, but which must be observed under all conditions, was a task none too easy. 
During the stay of Baba's emissary at Mysore for a week a thorough search was made for residential quarters required for our party. None ideally suited to our requirements could be had. Some­thing, however, was required to be done. The group had already left Meherabad and were awaiting information from this side for a start from Sholapur. Some three or four houses, though not quite ideal but with the nearest approach to our requirements, were kept in sight for Baba's selection and approval when he arrived. Yet in the face of these uncertain conditions, the Master wired from Sholapur that he was definitely leaving for Mysore, not as expected with one or two disciples for approving the bungalows seen, but with the entire group, arriving Bangalore en route where arrange­ments were to be made for one day's stay. In compliance with the Master's instructions, strenuous efforts were made and a last moment arrangement was made for a day's stay in Bangalore. More than 25 of the group were ushered in two rooms in a private boarding house, while others were lodged in a small hotel nearby. 
3 BANGALORE 
The Master's mandali from Meherbad with their luggage, and another party arriving from Jubbulpore were all booked for Mysore which was the 

destination for all to shift from Meherabad. The group in Ban­galore too were all passing time in great inconvenience in the hope that they were all to leave for Mysore in a day. 
But something unexpected always happens with Baba's move­ments and activites. Bangalore was NO exception to it. Events during these last few days amply prove it. 
Of all other factors that the Master considers in the inaugu­ration of a scheme, the spirit of co­operation and response are amongst the principal ones. 
It requires deep perception and inner vision to look into the depths of plans of a Master like Baba. The present Dewan of this State, Sir Mirza Ismail, whose contribution towards making it a first class and model state that it is today is well-known. He would leave nothing pass unnoticed that would contri­bute towards the betterment of the State. Probably he saw in Meher Baba a great spiritual leader whose influence had spread the world over and whose presence and work would be an asset to the State in its material and spiritual emancipation. His interest from that viewpoint since the beginning of the Master's arrival and stay in Mysore in 1935, and his personal coming in at the right moment this time with whole-hearted co­operation from himself and other officials of the State under him in the Master's Universal Centre scheme could not be left unappreciated. This may truly be said to have played a great part in keeping the Master in Bangalore to start his unique Centre on an ideal site in or around this model city of the State. 
THE SITES SUGGESTED AND SELECTED 
(a) The first site near the Chamarajendra Water Works in Teppagondanahali village of the Bangalore District, about 20 miles from Bangalore, was ideally enchanting and most impressive at first sight. Baba wanted to go and stay there in the inspection bunga­low for two or three days, look all around for the actual spot, and instruct the Executive Engineer of the district to work it out as desired. This site was subsequently given up in preference to the one des­cribed hereunder. 

BYRAMANGALA 
(b) Another more interesting site was then suggested later by Sir Mirza near the Byramangala Tank now under construction. Baba was taken to see the sight by the Chief Engineer of the Mysore State accompanied by the Executive Engineer of the Bangalore Division. It was an ideal site with a fertile soil and in immediate vicinity to the new artificial lake which, when completed, was supposed to irrigate about 4000 acres of the surrounding land and which would greatly add to the beauty of the site with its peaceful surroundings and attrac­tive background of distant hills. 
When it was explained that the site was nearer to Mysore, yet only 22 miles from Bangalore and just 2 miles away from the Bidali railway station, and also on the main motor route between Bangalore and Mysore and thus easily accesible for all, Baba at once approved of it. The new branch road that con­nected the main motor road with the site was just nearing completion. It was stated that this new road would be finished within ten days, and a day was fixed when Baba's car would be the first to pass over it. On the first of September, the Master went there again, and as al­ready arranged, he was driven to the site by the newly constructed road. He inspected the site once again; and ascertained the place where the actual building work should be carried out. 
The details of the measurement and assessment, etc., being worked out by the government officials, negotiations are now going on and nearing completion for the purchase of the land, probably by the next week. Meanwhile, the lay-out plans of the entire scheme and its different sections are also under preparation and expected to be finished shortly. The Master wishes to start building work at the earliest. 
WHERE IS GOD ? (An Interesting Discourse by Baba) One morning, during the usual talks with the mandali, Baba lightly touched upon an interesting subject about God. He abruptly started asking everyone in the room the 

question, "Where is God?" All replied on the spur of the moment, in various ways. One said, “Everywhere,” another replied, “In the soul,” the third pointing at heart softly whispered “Here.” One argued about the conception of God and then tried to answer. Another expressing his inability for a solution, answered, "It is the eternal problem." Thus the question went around till it came to the turn of Dr. D.., who was the last of all asked by Baba. He seemed to have smilingly surveyed the situation all the time, and came out with the spontaneous assertion—"In Baba." 
For a moment all were taken aback. It was so simple, so natural, so easy. Baba then pointed out that if we all took him as our Master, Perfect and One with the Infinite, and honestly believed it, THAT was the only conclusion—logical, true and simple. 
Baba's object in asking us this question was probably to draw out of all present what we have learnt in different ways and degrees, and from that explain further. Giving his own answer and explanation to this most interesting and impor­tant question, Baba went on:— 
"God is where you (individuals named as K.., or A..) are not. That is a reality. 
"Where you (as so and so) are, God is not. That, your being aloof from God, is an illusion. 
"Where your false ego estab­lishes itself as you (so and so) and says you are, God cannot stay. 
"When your false ego as you disappears, God comes in." 
Referring to the group's various answers individually given, Baba further explained: 
1. 
"To say 'God is everywhere’ is a general term, and nothing new. Pandits all over say that and Vedanta is full of this explanation. To merely say it is of no use. You must find it, feel it, experience it." 

2. 
"To say that 'God is in the heart' is again part truth. If God is everywhere as you all know and say, why then should you limit His beeing only in the heart, and not in the head or your thumb or toe? Why should you try to see Him in one particular part and not in the other? That is a common mistake and characteristic 



human weakness to spot the Highest and most Beloved, or revered up above, somewhere in the skies or in the heavens. or when sought in the body, to find Him only in the parts men like best, i.e., in the heart or the eye, as if He did not exist equally elsewhere in other parts, in the back or the bones, in the nails or in the flesh. Is God in the rose and not in the thorn? Or in flowers and not in filth? This weak­ness of seeking God in things you like and shuddering at the idea of His existence in things you do not like or abhor, must be overcome. It is only when you rise above all these ideas of good and bad, and recognize, see and feel flowers and filth alike, and find God equally in all, that you could be said to have learnt and known something real. Otherwise it is all parrotlike, a false conception, an illusion. 
Besides, taking it for granted that the best and most ideal abode for God to dwell in the human body is the heart, it must be remembered clearly that even in this best abode dedicated by human beings for God to dwell, He who is the Purest of the Pure would not 
come in unless that abode of the heart, however spontaneously and lovingly offered, is absolutely clear, empty and devoid of any foreign element. The slightest hindrance in the shape of an alien thought would prevent Him coming. And those who truly want God to dwell in their hearts must have them utterly clean and empty, devoid of selfish desires, i.e. lust, greed, etc." 
3. Coming to the answer given that "one should first form a con­ception of God and then reply" and the long philosophical explanation that followed, the Master pointed out: "All these talks are cut and dry. Pandits babble it everywhere, for years, without finding any clue, till they die babbling. The orthodox section of all communities listen to these innumerable dissertations by religious students and scriptural scholars, and form various pet beliefs about God and His exis­tence somewhere in the skies or in the best things, and not in others, and cling to these erroneous ideas tenaciously without the least effort at enlightenment or to go beyond the four walls. They 

refuse even to talk or listen to the fact of having actual experience, and consider it blasphemy even to think of it. It is only these talks and philoso­phies that appeal to them, and they are quite satisfied with these. That is why I say it is all philosophy and of no use without experience. One must try not only to learn and know, but to feel and experience.'' 
4. Referring to an answer that "finding God is the eternal problem and struggle", Baba explained: "It is true; but one must not stop there and make no efforts, taking that problem as impossible to solve, and feeling despondent give it up. That search and struggle must continue, with added vigour and enthusiasm at every step and the longing developed so intense that it becomes one's only problem in life. To that end, he should struggle, moving on and on, and try to find all sources of enlightenment in the solution of this. The best, easiest and quickest way is to find a Guru who has realized God. Although that is not easy of all, and one may have to come across many false and fake 
ones before he finds the real one; but, if the longing for that eternal search is kept up, he shall come across one who will guide him aright to the goal. Even those living in company with a Master should not feel content, and merely say that they have found everything because they have found a living Master. For even though it is a true statement, it lacks actual experience. And experience can never be had without effort. So try all of you to see your Master as he really is, and not as he appears to you, and even in your Master try to find that Infinite Existence that pervades everywhere.” 
WHERE GOD IS NOT? 
After discussing the affirmative side of this question, Baba explained the same from its negative aspect also, ask­ing in turns the same question 
negatively, "Where God is not (does not exist)?" It rather puzzled all, abruptly as it came. In the Master's august presence, it is the general experience and also a fact that all feel lost at times, especially when he tries to bring out something from one or the other, and explain some­

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
thing to the group. The best and cleverest brains are lost in thinking. The Master at these particular moments uses these formal talks for his working. In reply to the negative question asked, which left all thinking, one of the mandali spoke out “Nowehere”. That is the word the only one that is so expressive, so con­
vincing. If God exists everywhere, certainly there is no spot or speck on earth where he does not exist. Hence this reply “nowhere” conveys every­thing that the negative question as asked by Baba required. He closed the topic with his concluding and significant remarks, “God does not exist where there is duality.” 


