



My Experiences* 

BY CHHOTA BABA 
One of the Boy Disciples of the Meher Ashram 


    I joined the Meher Ashram Institute on the 9th August 1927. For the first two and a half months I stayed with the grown up disciples of the Master and could not mix with the boys of the Meher Ashram proper. But on the 25th of October I was admitted into the Meher Ashram as a student. Besides secular instruction, spiritual instruction was imparted to boys by competent teachers, in accordance with the com≠mands of Shri Meher Baba. From about the middle of November, the Holy Master Himself began to feed us on spiritual knowledge. Though we (boys) were not out of our teens, the Master instilled into our minds great spiritual facts, of which even yogis of the fourth cosmic plane are unconscious, intel≠lectually acquainted us more and more with the Path, and gradually went on imparting spirituality to those of us who were fit for it. One night, after delivering a spiritual scientific dis≠course, the Master said to me, "Child, have faith and try your best; I will make 'gold' of you. " These words of my beloved Master produced a great im≠pression on my mind, quite out of pro≠portion to what one would expect. The above words were surcharged with spirituality, and they made me rest≠less... A great spiritual longing took possession of me, and every moment of my waking state I said to myself, "When will this dust of myself turn into gold?" 

    A great revolution was effected in me. Boys and disciples wondered at my changed state. I myself wondered at it. Sound sleep I could not get, and all relish for any kind of food vanished. One day, in 



*The case of Abdulla or Chhota Baba presents one of the most clear-cut examples of the tremendous influence of Shri Meher Baba upon those who came into contact with him. We here reproduce Hazrat Abdulla's recount of his own experience previously published in the "Meher Message". 

the month of December, while par≠taking of dinner, I felt a sort of great sensation in my body, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. Tears rolled down my cheeks, and I could not restrain myself from crying loudly. Everything around seemed to whirl and then vanish. My blood became extremely hot, and heat pierced my body from inside. Then I swooned. When I recovered, I saw my beloved Master sitting near me. I could not help crying and pressing His lotus feet to my eyes. I kissed them now and then. He calmed me and gave me a cup of milk. 

    I could now think of nothing and nobody but the Master. I simply could not help meditating on him continu≠ously. Even in school hours when I was apparently reading, my heart was with my Beloved. Sometimes while medi≠tating, I used to see Him with my subtle eyes sitting near me, with His right hand on my head. Mere sight of Him, whether gross or subtle, used to make me weep. By the middle of December, on account of my devotion and constant meditation,  such love took possession of my heart that it made me, so to say, 

''

mad  for my Beloved. Separation from Him made me suffer intensely. I was contented only when I was with Him. This love was Divine Love, a gift from the Masteróthe love about which Shams-e-Tabriz says: "Shamsul Hacke Tabriz chn begshood paray ishque, jibreelle amin ra ze paye kheesh davan kerd." i.e. "When Shamsul Hacke Tabriz opened the wings of love, it made the Angel Gabriel run after Him. " Needless to say that by gaining this love, I became entirely free from the snares of worldly Maya. Nothing seem≠ed to interest me, net even my exis≠tence. It was through the 'Divine Love' that by the grace of my Beloved Master I was transformed into my present state, which only a few in the world experience. One day, in January 1928, when the Holy Master was imparting instruction to boys and disciples, I began feeling that I was losing my consciousness, and after blurting out,"Oh, Baba," I actually lost it. I became unconscious of everything except the Divine Form of the Master. For four days I continuously 



remained unconscious of the gross '  dream with the reality, take bad for  

world but conscious of the Masters  good, and, forgetting the soul, they  

Divine Form which I was seeing in my- regard the gross world as the only  

self.  reality. Ignoramuses look at the mirage  

On the fifth day my gross conscious- and think they are the body which is a  

ness was restored to me, but with its  mere instrument, and not the glorious '  

restoration, the Divine Form of the  effulgent Self' or Atman. When dis- 

Master which, be it remembered, has  crimination makes its appearance, the  

nothing to do with his body, did not  net of ignorance disappears and the  

vanish. Since then I began seeing it in  Reality is seen through the eyes of  

everything, in everybody, and enjoying  discrimination. Finally, in the words of  

ineffable spiritual bliss, for which I  the sages, I say, "Neither despise any  

have paid a heavy price. Before I at- being, nor look with contempt on  

tained to my present blissful state, I had  others; but attempt, if ye can, to give all  

oft read and heard that this gross world  a helping hand; for Oneness is the  

is nothing but Maya. I could not under- secret, and the journey is towards the  

stand properly why it was called Maya,  same goal. Believe in the splendour and  

but now I see for myself that it is really  glory of thine own goal. There is the  

so.  treasure of infinite freedom, power and  

    God is real. Everything else is un≠ purity; so avoid throwing an evil '  

real. Ignorance is the cause of all mis- thought into the world. Dont think that  

eries, of scepticism, hatred and egoism.  thou art born a bound slave full of  

All the various kinds of impressions, all  impurity, for it is forbidden. Weakness  

attachments and errors of man have for  never existed but strength, darkness  

their sources ignorance and non-dis≠ never existed but Light and Love from  

crimination. Many persons confuse the   the beginning and so for ever."  

.  
