

.  





How I Met Them And What 
They Told Me* 


BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA 

It was years after I had met many mystics, in the ordinary course of life as well as out of it, that I remembered Baba's words: "You will meet many more of the type." 

There can be no end to the classi≠fication of mystics, just as there is no end to the common ideas about them. If a proper search is made, it is not beyond the pale of possibility to find mystics to fit into every one of the popular beliefs and notions about them. Generally, it is held that either they can only be found in far away mountains and solitary retirements, or that true mystics are only those who mix freely in worldly affairs, serve themselves, their own people and country, and, amidst all that, carry on 'religious and spiritual practices.' 

The fact is that the external sur≠roundings, situation and difference in the mode and manner of worldly life has nothing to do with a mystic. The life of a mystic is but an attitude of the mind. The basis for this mystic attitude and its expression, in everyday life, is again simply a question of the inherent aptitude of the individual mind. Mys≠tics can and do exist in all strata of society, be it politics, business, service, household life, as well as amongst the fakirs and sadhus. They may exist as abundantly in the throes of a busy city stock exchange as in the caves in far away mountains. Some live openly as mystics and some remain unknown, even to their neighbours. 

But all mystics are not alike. For the five Master Mystics who constantly and continuously are experiencing the state of perfection without change and without end for all times and under all conditions, there may be millions of mystics in the different stages and 


states of the spiritual path. Some mystics may just be struggling in the initial stage. Some may be toiling to≠wards an advance into the next higher state. There are mystics for whom nature is an open book and the past, present and future hold no mysteries. For a few, time and space do not count, inasmuch as the latter can present themselves in any part or parts of the universe at one and the same time simultaneously with the thought of doing so. The spiritual position and progress of a mystic has, again, nothing to do with his possessions and achieve≠ments in the material sphere. A mystic may also happen to be an intellectual giant and, to all appearances, control≠ling the political destiny of a nation, and yet he may, knowingly or un≠knowingly, be a subordinate to an illiterate and apparently destitute beg≠gar of a mystic who may be sufficiently advanced to be actually controlling the fate of a whole country towards its spiritual emancipation. 

There is no hard and fast rule for the making of a mystic, nor any physical means to measure their mystical a≠chievements and progress. These are the two main factors which lead many sincere people to run down all mystics indiscriminately and cause those in≠clined mystically to over-estimate themselves as well as to enable rogues and charlatans to deceive some of the people, some of the time, for base and selfish motives. As long as the aim and object of a person is purely spiritual enlightenment, no harm results even if a bogus mystic is encountered. On the other hand, meetings with true mystics are always of immense benefit from the spiritual point of view. 

After my introduction with Mr. C., as a friend, I found him for the first few days to be anything but a mystic. A man with average intelligence and common sense, he lived the routine family life as shrewdly and carefully as any other man of town. Well posted on current events with a considerable command over general literature, he was, on the whole, an ordinarily plea≠sant man to talk with until I happened to call on him once after 8 p.m. "Every evening I do a little bhajan-kirtan ( de≠votional recitations ) and it is 


time to begin. If you don't mind I would like you to keep company with me," said he. Having nothing particular to do I accepted the invitation. Within a few minutes his family, neighbours and servants began trooping into the hall until it was fairly full. The little audience was serious with awe and reverence, although Mr. C. continued talking with me lightly until he started to play with the 'tals' (a small pair of saucer-like brass instruments). The way it all started, mechanically and in an orderly fashion, the function appeared to be a tame family affair of daily worship and prayers, and I felt sorry to have been caught in the dry atmosphere of a drab ceremony. 

After going through the formalities of arti-puja (religious ceremony) Mr. 

C. began his bhajan-kirtan. He could neither sing nor had he a sweet voice, but his recitations bore a distinct air of deep devotion. When he began to inter≠cept the bhajan, with a running com≠mentary in between the poetic lines in a style peculiar to himself, he suddenly became devotion personified. He ceas≠ed to be an individual addressing other individuals, or the paraphernalia of worship before him. It was as if at one and the same time he was talking to himself, with those around him and with the stars twinkling in the sky, outside the doors and windows of the hall. Perhaps, at that hour, it would have made no difference to him whet≠her he had an audience of a thousand people or a stone-dead wall before him. He was practically dancing all the time on his seat in tune with his ' tals' and flashes in his eyes now appeared full of sparking light. I will try to picturize him a little more in cold print.

 ".......a thief?" He almost shrieked out the question, abruptly stopping his twinkling music and poetry. "That does not matter at all, " he replied to himself with a gesture of intense indifference which was immediately followed by a thundering challenge, "No power dare arrest or restrain anyone on any ac≠count." He completed the poetic line and was now very persuasive: "Pious or sinners, both are equally welcome in this path. Nature itself is a thief," up 





  

went his finger with decisive accusa≠tion; "Our greatest treasure has been snatched from us. " There was unmis≠takable pity in the tone that soon changed into an assurance of confi≠dence; "It is concealed, but it is there, safe and within reach. " After bursting into a little song, he invited, "Come on," then appealed, "Come quick," and once again began to thunder: "Let's snatch it, never mind if we have to rob it, but we must get it. " Again some recitaion and the twinkling of the ' tals' and then, as if defending and arguing the point to a finish, he pleaded earn≠estly: "Oh, you do not know what that treasure is, but it is ours, our own and not far away, I am positively certain not far away; what is wanted is a will, a strong and steadfast will." 

Mr. P. was introduced to me at a hill-station as a business man from Bom≠bay, out for a change. He was the picture of robust health, neatly dressed in simple but well cut clothes. From his scrupulously trimmed finger nails to his carefully brushed hair, he showed every sign of great care for his personal ap≠pearance. But for all the marks of phy≠sical and mental well being, he wore a mask of patient boredom, during the half hour that we happened to be to≠gether. Thinking him to he troubled with a lean business and financial wor≠ries, I remarked upon trade depression, the tightening of the money market and difficulty in collection. "But for all that," he said, "Those who have few wants can have very little to worry about. For a sensible man it is so very cheap to lead a really good life, and business men have necessarily to be sensible." I then tried to switch from politics to sport and from sport to society, but I failed in getting a conver≠sational response from this sphinx-like man. Learning that he was thirty-five and still unmarried, love and dis≠appointment seemed to be just the subject to kill time. But I was soon up against a dead wall. "All that I love and have ever loved is solitude and to be all myself," said he. "What do you do?" I asked in desperation; "Read or write?" For the first time he smiled and the mystic was unmasked when he 


replied, "I enjoy. " To be quite sure of his meaning I asked again, "Enjoy what?" "Enjoyment," was the one word he spoke: he spoke in a simple matter-of-fact tone. "It is a pity," I said. This time it was his turn to look at me with interest through his gold-rimmed glas≠ses and ask me pointedly, "Pity for what?" Had I known your enjoyment business earlier," I explained, "We could have amused each other better. " He then discussed with me about a suitable spot in the surrounding hills to retire in solitude for a couple of months. When the plan was completed, I reminded him to make arrangements for his food, and added, by way of joke, "You have nearly an hundred pounds of fat to take care of. " "Don't worry, " he replied, "It is enough to take care of me during my retirement." 

During the first two years of my 'field-service' with Baba (moving about from place to place, doing all sorts of odd jobs including that of a coolie and labourer as and when an occasion arose) I happened to be in Sukkur, before it became famous for one of the largest barrage schemes in the world. It is one of the hottest cites in Sind where in Hazrat Bachal Shah, a Muslim Mas≠ter, lived his earthly life and died. His tomb is situated on the banks of the famous river surrounded by tall shady trees, on the same site where he worked out his life mission. It is a place of regular pilgrimage for both Hindus and Muslims of Sind who hold Bachal Shah in great esteem to this day. When I went there to pay my respects, the cool and shady spot was tempting enough, in the sweltering heat, to make me lie down for a while under one of the trees in the garden after I had finished with my duty offering the Fatcha (prayers). But before I could doze off I had to open wide my eyes for an old woman moving about the grounds who appear≠ed, from a distance, to be an exact double of Hazrat Babajan of Poona. She was about the same height, the same build, with an identical crown of snow-white curly hair, her face was all wrinkles and lines and she had a peculiar knack of a continuous move≠ment about herself. This characteristic similarity to the Qutab (Sadguru) 





  

of Poona made me mark her very min≠utely from where I was lying down. All the time she was rapidly going here and there as if extremely busy, although I failed to mark anything definite she did except when she filled a chetty with water. It was not long before I could see that, unlike Hazrat Babajan, she had vacant dreamy eyes, darker comple≠xion, constant restlessness and above all a habit of loudly muttering to herself in an incomprehensible language all the time as she flitted about. Thus, satis≠fying my passing curiosity, I fell back into the blank of a nice good nap. 

By the time I was up and about the sun had gone down considerably, I pre≠ferred to take a stroll by the river-side before leaving the pleasing atmosphere for good. At the end of a bend in the path, I came across the moving and muttering old lady. To my utter amaze≠ment I found I was looking down into a pair of most intelligent eyes, fixed in steadfast gaze into my own without a flicker. Those wrinkles and lines in her face became eloquent with wisdom as if to complete the extraordinary trans≠formation; she spoke in the challenging tone of the 'who goes there' of a sentry in clear Urdu; "Tera Pir cown hai?" (Who is thy spiritual guide?) The only spontaneous word I could utter point blank was, "Meher Baba ". The moment she heard this, she said, "Bashah" (King), and then after a momentary pause added, "Shahenshah" (Emperor). With these two words, like a flash of lightning she shrank back in her vacant dreamy eyes and resumed moving about muttering incoherently. I fol≠lowed her deliberately and managed to cross her path twice hoping to hear something more, but she ignored me completely. For the time being the immediate surroundings appeared to have passed out of existence for her. 

Just as in special services only those on the top rung of the ladder know the ultimate source of direction, and the subordinates merely have to carry out orders from 'above', only a few most advanced mystics can recognize the 'SahebeñWakhta' (The Master of the Age) in the physical plane: and many amongst the less advanced mystics, entrusted 


with the duties in the spiritual direction mystic, having recognized the Sahebe≠of world affairs, have to carry out the Wakhta, I could think of nothing else intuitive instructions without neces-for the moment than to make enquires sarily knowing the source of their ema-about her antecedents and local repu≠nation. The great 'moving muttering' tation which lead me into another 

pleasant surprise of the day. 



(To be continued) 
