Shri Meher Baba's explanations of some of the obscure passages in the gospels have thrown new light upon the life of Jesus, whom he describes as the particular Avatar of Nazareth. "Christ" is the "Son of God" state, and thus these two names indicate his unique office and identity with God. 
It is the life of the Master that quickens the understanding of those who share it with him, and some of Shri Meher Baba’s disciples in the West have had their early faith in Jesus revived and intensified by contact with him. There are also many instances which they have witnessed, which illumine the story of Jesus, so familiar since childhood, and his power in reaching the heart of his audience and knowledge of their lives enhance what we know of the founder of the Western religion. 
Shri Meher Baba has indicated the scope of his own work, in his world message of 1933, and 
diagnosed the ills of the world. He said in the first portion: "Self interest, caused by low selfish desire, is the root cause of contem­porary world chaos and individual misery. My manifestation will embrace the religious, economic, social and political aspects of life. It will spiritualize all human activities in art, science, music, stage and cinema.” 
Both John Baptist and the Master called the people to repentance, and today a change of heart is as essential. Baba has shown how the Master effects this, inwardly, by the removal of sanskaras that prevent the mind from reflecting the true nature of man. The words of Jesus to the sick of the palsy, forgiving the man's sins, accomplished his spiritual healing, which Baba says is the Master's real work in the removal of his sanskaras. Jesus also restored health of body, as a testimony 

to the Sadducees who doubted his status to forgive sins, and as a reward to the man and his friends for their faith in removing the house roof to get the Master's presence. Baba has explained on other occa­sions that the Master combines his work of healing outwardly as in this case with inner work for whole types of humanity, similarly affec­ted, and for that also faith and devotion are important. 
This work of the Divine Love, described in the gospels, touched every aspect of the people's lives in Palestine, and Baba, in this later age of mental activity and material progress, uses modern methods in his own way, sometimes unex­pected. Jesus disturbed the outlook of his audiences and their cherished prejudices. 
The West has not maintained the unbroken tradition of the Masters of Perfection and of the successive appearances of the Avatar, carrying out His eternal work. In the person of Jesus, the Church preserved the triune aspect of deity—the Source, the Divine Son and His Eternal Spirit, as Father, Son and Holy Ghost; in the Avatar, these are seen to be one. The Church affirms his union with the Father, and his Grace manifests eternally. Jesus, speaking of himself, declared: "Before Abraham was, I Am." Moses had said: "I Am hath sent me." In those early Jewish records preserved in our Western Bible, may be found references to the lives of the Avatar in the past and some of the names and places where he manifested. 
The Avatar's work for the race includes His help for individual aspirants along the Path. Jesus pointed the rich young man, who asked what he should do to inherit eternal life, first to the command­ments which he had kept from his youth up; then pouring out divine love, He showed him the way to become perfect, to sell all and follow Him. Baba has emphasized that it is impossible for the pilgrim on the spiritual path to attain the infinite consciousness, which is the Christ, the "Son of God" state without the help of a Perfect Master, and in the case of the rich young man, Jesus required external renun­ciation and complete surrender. On other occasions, He spoke of 

Himself as "the Way, the Truth and the Life", and also of the "Mansions" in the Father's house, terms familiar to mystics of all faiths, and connected with the Path. 
Western children are very familiar with the story of Jesus in the temple at the age of 12, expounding the law to the learned Doctors, much to His parents' astonishment. Later in His life, the people attending the syna­gogue wondered at His gracious words, and asked each other, ''Whence hath this man letters, having never learned?" Baba has said that the Master's knowledge is innate, and not acquired; thus Jesus “spoke as one having authority, and not as the scribes”. One of the earliest critics of the Master objected to His treatment of the pharisees and other opponents as evidence against His own teaching of Love, seeing that in the exposure of their methods and character, there is no trace of Love in His words. There could be no greater condemnation than the words of the Master so often repeated: "Woe unto you scribes and pharisees, hypocrites." 
Abuse by the Master is one of His greatest blessings to others, for by so doing He is attracting the deepest sanskaras from him whom He reviles to Himself for their removal. Those present with Baba on 27th February 1929 at Dongergan near Ahmednagar will remember their surprise when Baba suddenly com­menced to abuse five of His absent disciples, for no apparent reason. Again and again He said: “Do they mean to die?” Unknown to the others, those disciples were in grave physi­cal peril; in a moment of foolhardy bravado, they had climbed a hill 1000 feet high by its most dangerous approach, and were then attempting its descent by the same route, which is much more dangerous than the as­cent. After a short distance, they realized they could neither turn back, nor remain still, and in this time of extreme peril they called on Baba for help, as never before, while contin­uing the descent, eventually arriving without the slightest harm. It was only on their return that those who had been with the Master learned of their peril, and realized why Baba had so acted, removing the dangerous sanskaras to protect them. 

Baba has also explained the significance of the use of violence by the Master, in removing the deep seated sanskaras which need that special form of energy to be manifested outwardly by him. The drastic cleansing of the temple of its money changers and merchants by Jesus, with the whips of small cords, is thus explained: Perhaps it extended beyond those who were there in person to the whole history of the place, around which clus­tered the Jewish Mosaic tradition and its connection with ancient Egypt; the Master's anger must not be confused with the ordinary emotions of people whose feelings are out of control and subject to disturbances in their minds, and Jesus' words to Peter, "Get thee behind Me, Satan," have this inner aspect. 
Shri Meher Baba has also been known to use violence. When He first told the Brahmin boys of His school to sit with the untouchable boys, they did not hesitate; but some of His adult Brahmin follow­ers who were present could not restrain their emotion, and one in particular was deeply moved. Baba, with fire in His eyes, reproved them sternly, and giving His body a slight blow, added: "I have put on this body with a view to destroying the whole fabric of the caste system, and destroy it I will, despite the opposition of the bigoted Brahmins. The caste system is as absurd as it is tyrannous. It has nothing to do with religion in the true sense of the word." 
Every word and act of the Master has its significance, and in striking His own body, it may perhaps be seen that through its sufferings the emancipation of the people will be secured. 
Baba has explained that a Master's visits to certain centres have significance in His inner work. Jesus by His presence in the temple would link His own work with those who preceded Him, some­thing far more potent than the na­tional aspirations that centre round Solomon's Temple, and its mystic and occult symbols picture the stages of man's search for truth, which the Master lives before humanity, and then the symbol, useful in its own perspective, ceases to be of value. The Master is in each heart, one with the Infinite Life in all, and He brings that experience in the degree best suited to the capacity of each. 

Baba has explained that the Master transmits by His spoken word the greatest spiritual power. Thus the words of Jesus in the temple, when He cleared away the traders and money changers, have deeper significance than they imply outwardly. In identifying himseif with the Father when saying, "My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer," He utilized the intense aspirations of the Jews for long generations, as a power house of spiritual energy released by His Divine Love, to serve as a focus for all humanity to realize the One God and Father of all. It is true, the temple was destroyed by the Romans soon after, but the real temple of the Spirit, in which God may be experienced completely, is the human form, as Baba has explained in connection with the evolution of form from the stone to its highest manifestation in man. 
Jesus was for ever pointing the people to the Kingdom of Heaven within the heart, the abode of the spirit that the temple of Solomon symbolises. The new wine of the spirit that He brings cannot be con­fined in outworn creeds and rituals and ideas which have had their day. 
It must have been a time when spirituality was at a very low ebb, for a Ruler of the Jews to be as ignorant as was Nicodemus, of the spiritual re-birth, which Jesus explained to Him through the simile of the wind of which none could tell the source or see the course. With the outcast too, He was as patient; seated with the woman at Samaria at the well, athirst and weary from His journey, He listened to her own limited ideas of religion which she had learned since childhood, forgetting His own physical need for the water while giving her of the water of life, and at last revealing to her that He was the Messiah of her own hopes. No wonder that she could be the vehi­cle of His grace for her townsfolk who accepted Him from her witness first, and also when they 

invited Him to stay with them, To both her and the returning disciples, amazed at seeing them together, He pointed the way from their national prejudices to the wide brotherhood of the human race in love of God and Man. 
