




Nores from my Diary 

F. H. DADACHANJI

 BENARES 

    From Jubbulpore, in Central Prov≠inces, our big bus wended its way towards the holy city of the Hindus ó Benaresóon the river Ganges which is one of the largest rivers in India, besides for untold centuries considered very sacred. The highly reverential feeling for the sacredn ess of both the river and the city ri sing above its bank could be judged from the fact that throughout the year hundreds of thousands of pilgrim s come here from every part of India 's great continent to bathe in its holy waters, and, at certain times in th e year during festivals, the number of these pilgrim s goes be yond count. 

    The live desire of every religious-minded Hindu is to visit this sac red place and h ave a b ath in its purifying waters, at least once if not every y ear. There is s till a be lief among the religious masses of the Hindus that dying and being burnt on the ghauts (river banks) of the Holy Ganges wipes out one's sanskaras (impressions) of lives, and the soul gets Mukti (liberation from the chain of births and deaths). If for want of m eans or for any other unavoidable reasons, going to Benares and dying there is not possible, the ashes of thousands of Hindus who die elsewhere, even in the rem otest parts of the country, are, whenever possible, brought ove r great distances to be th rown into th e holy water s of Ganga Mayya (the mother Ganges who liberates). A fresh incident m ay be worth mentioning. H. H. the Maharaja Gaikwad of Baroda recently died in Bombay, and his body was taken to his capital (Baroda) to lie in state for the last homage of his subjects, and after≠wards burnt there. The ashes, however, were taken by a special train to a distance of over a t housand miles to be interned into the sac red waters of the Ganges, at Allahabad, a city situated on the junction of the two riversóthe Ganges and the Jumnaóboth of which have their sources in the Hi malayas. (A junction of two rivers is considered very sacred by the Hindus, this partic≠ular junction of two of the m ost im≠portant rivers being considered highly sacred.)



    It is for reasons of such life offerings that numerous shrines and te mples, dedicated to various gods and god≠desses of the Hindus, have been built there by the Rajas and Maharajas (Indian princes) as well as by other wealthy Hindus who, on several occa≠sions in their lifetime, visit Benares on pilgrimage. Some make this pilgrimage almost every year, and have their palaces built there overhanging the ghauts where they s tay during the sojourn. It is custom ary that after these rulers of Indian States and other well-to-do Hindus complete their r itual of purification in th e holy waters, free distribution of sweets and food, especially to the poor, is m ade in their names. Some rulers have erected resting houses for their poor subjects to stay during their pilgrim age, so have other Hindus built many sarais (resting houses) for  pilgrims. Benares has thus become the greatest place of pilgrimage for millions of Hindus every year. Yet for each w ho comes here, there are many who, for some reason or another, are unable to m ake the journey. T hey have the holy waters brought over, at times even hundreds of m iles, by a returning pilgrim from the holy place, and these less fortunate ones thus have the consolation and satisfaction at least of having tasted the holy waters of Gangaji (Ganges) that wash off their sanskaras or sins and purify their souls. This general description is m eant to give our readers, esp ecially the W est≠erners, an idea of the highly sanctif ied environments of this place which is mostly included in all itin eraries of India for its great religious im portance. A few words, however, related from Baba's explanation regarding the spiri≠tual significance of such a place w hich is held so sacred by m illions, are worth mentioning. Asked as to the spiritual significance behind this religious im ≠portance given by millions of Hindus to the shrines and tem ples erected in Benares, Baba explained that: "Since times of old, there have been endless numbers of Rishis and Tapaswis (ascetics) who have lived there for years, practised penan ces, meditated and were in high states of Samadhi (spiritual trance)." Baba also added that "GREAT SOULS SUCH AS RAMA, KRISHNA. BUDDHA AND EVEN JESUS HAD BEEN HERE DURING CERTAIN PERIODS OF THEIR LIVES. It is due to these highly evolved souls and Masters of their age that the place is surcharged with spiri≠tual atmosphere. True sanctity does not lie in the dead walls of brick and stone or even the waters, but it is in the great living beings who stayed here and filled the environment with the fire of their devotion, love and worship, and in the great spiritual forces released by the Masters during their stay hereÖ" 



    Baba and party stayed at Benares for some days, and visited places chosen by him. One of these was a short ride in a sailing boat on the Ganges. Those of the group who accompanied the Master on this trip along the river bank at an early-hour of the da y felt that though Baba was physically with them, he seemed to be away elsewhere spiri≠tually working. Another interesting place to which Baba to ok his disciples was Sarnath, a few m iles away, where are preserved interesting Buddhistic remains. It is here that Buddha had his first centre with his disciples around him.

    Baba also went around the city in a tonga (horse-carriage) with two of us driving through the busiest thorough≠fares, streets and lanes thickly inhabited by the natives, espe cially the po or. During the drive, we would come across certain types of faqirs (God≠intoxicated souls) and such other per≠sons in beggarly attire. Baba would just cast a glance at particular ones am ongst these, would order a coin or m ore to be given in certain cases, thus establishing an inner contact which they would faintly feel conscious of in their spiritually-dazed state. No words would pass, and the m eeting would be in passing for only a moment in silent recognition between the two. It is a privilege to watch the Master work thus, in a most wonderfully subtle way, in which he would contact them, instructing us to driv e in certain direc≠tions, and spotting ou t of the crowds the right person on whom he would bestow a mom entary yet signif icant glanceóall too subtle for description. 



    From here, we m ove on to our next halt, Agra, the city of immortal Taj. En route, Baba and party pass through Allahabad, the capita l of the United Provinces. Here, the Master got out alone and looked upon the junction of the two rivers, the Ganges and the Jumna. 

AGRA 

One of the world's most beautiful and inspiring sites is the "Taj Maha l", that "dream in m arble" which, f or its ex≠quisite symmetry and grace and for its marvellous richness and beauty of its materials, is unequalled. It is th e tomb of Mumtaz Mahal, wife of the great Moghul Emperor Shah Jehan, by whom it was raised in memorial and tribute of their love. The following lines give one an idea of this gre at love that inspired an Emperor to erec t this world-famed mausoleum which perpetuates the memory of his beloved queen: 

That great tomb, rising 

prodigious still,   Matchless, perfect in 

form, a miracle 

Of grace, and tenderness, 

and symmetry.

 Pearl pure against the 

sapphire sky, 

The proud passion of an 

Emperor 's love 

Wrought into living stone 

which gleams and soars  

  With body of beauty, shin- 

ing soul and thought. 

So is the Taj. 

While one greatly appreciates and admires the love aspect of this in≠spiring monument that needed enor≠mous wealth and resources of a great Emperor. one cannot but pause to wonder why humanity is so in≠different towards the greater and deeper aspect of loveóthe L ove Divineóthat needs no we alth or riches of the world b ut the sim plest dedication of one 's self to the Divine Beloved! Of what use would all the wealth of the world be if it but creates a cu rtain of delusion that keeps one away from Divinity that is everyone's birthright! If Maya ' s hold is so strong, w hy not shake it off with the aid of a Spiritual Master? 



    Our stay at Agra was for about a week during which the ancient Fort was visited besides the Taj. Fatehpur Sikri (the city of ruins), about 20 miles away, was also amongst the historical places viewed by the group. 

   After summary glances at all these century-old monum ents of history and works of art, when the presence of Baba would m ake one feel the transient aspect of t hings of matter, however great, grand or beautiful, Baba would just touch the point with his ty pical gesture and words: "It is al l a big zeroóa dream." These words, uttered at the right moment, would touch the tenderest chords of each heart, and everyone would realize the g reat difference of the life of matter from the life of spirit. All the feeling of appreciation of th e greatness of th e Emperors who fl ourished in their times would fade away, and a true feeling of appreciati on of things of eternal value in life óthe life of the spiritówould hold. And it is for this particular reason that a spiritual Master like Baba takes his closest group of disciples even to these places of im portance in history, splendour and glamour to give them a clear contrast between life of mat≠ter and life of the spirit. 

   A whole day was specially given to visiting places directly connected with the life of Lord Krishna; Muttra where he w as born; Gokul where he was taken to save his l ife directly after his birth in prison and where he spent part of hi s early childhood; and Brindaban which is the sacred scene of his life and play with his gopies and where h e drew towards himself even the cow-herds with the melody of his flute. A great spiritual significance is attac hed to these places because of t he name and work of the Great Lord w ho lived there and re deemed humanity in his time. 

DELHI 

   Delhi, the Imperial Capital, was the next place we moved to stay. No other city, it is said, has seen so many ups and downs and ravages of time, of bloodshed in furious battles that decided the destinies of so many dynasties ever s ince the times of Rama, Pandavas and Kauravas. It is said to be built out of "seven cities" and has numerous buildings of historical im portance in an area of about 45 square m iles, which the ruins of the ancient cities cover. 



But Baba took the party to only a few of the m onuments of out≠standing importanceóthe Jumma Masjid, the Fort, and the Qutub Minar which, according to Baba, has importance even in the subtle world. One of the most inspiring of all is the famous t omb of Hazr at Niza≠muddin, the Qutub, who lived here centuries ago. Fuller details of this visit, in th e words of a W esterner, are given at th e end of this in stal≠ment. 

Baba's special work with the God-mad continued. 

It must be remembered that Mahomed, the principal inmate of the Master 's Ashram of the God-mad at Meherabad, has also been accom≠panying us since th e beginning, and even during the tour, Baba gives him his daily bath, food and personal treatment as usual, thus keeping in touch and maintaining the link of this special work he has been doing through the God-mad ever since the establishment of the   Ashram at Rahuri in 1936. An d it is this par≠ticular work, we noted, that, even during our constant m ovements, seems to be his preferred work in consideration of it s special impor≠tance as he alo ne knows. He spends about two hours almost every day with Mahomed who has now form ed the habit of constantly calling for "Dada", as he calls Baba. A lthough, as Baba stated, he is between the 3rd and 4th stage of spiritual advance≠ment in the planes, and his normal consciousness is not properly bal≠anced, Baba 's contact and his personal touch gr adually restores him to norm ality. His progress in coming down to this normal consciousness is very r emarkable. With it also unfolds his unique love for the Master. 

   But in Delhi, Baba wants some other God-mad to wash and f eed. Our mandali, therefore, start the search for these der elicts of humanity in this Imperial Capital City of India. Baba says there are many here, and c onfident in his words the disciples m ove about particular spots where these peculiar types of God-m ad gather and are found loitering. T hey manage to bring one, though with great difficulty. To get hold of such apparently crazed lovers of God m oving about in rags in a big city like Delhi a nd to persuade them to come with us to our place is a job indeed, known only to those who do it. And in this city, where we are q uite new, our talks with these peculiar types of humanity do certainly create a curi≠osity for the regular residents of this place, many of whom gather around and inquire as to why and where we are taking these people. It becomes a task indeed when we have to explain to them vaguely, keeping Baba 's identity undisclosed. But any w ay, when Baba wants a thing done, his inner guidance and help com e and enable the workers to accomplish at times the impossible. Baba felt very happy when he washed and f ed the one who proved to be the exact type he wanted and who needed a Master's touch and treatm ent most. Apart from the internal benefit he derived with the spiritual push he got through this personal contact and touch of the Master, his external transformation was also remarkable. Washed, cleaned, and shaved with a new white kafni (long robe) on, changed him entirely into a new being from what he appeared a f ew hours ago. W ith a blank expression he meekly submitted to a ll the loving care bestowed on him , and appeared blissfully happy when he walked out. Tear s however were seen in his eyes when he was lef t at the place from where th e mandali had brought him.



   On the day of Baba 's arrival with his party to India 's Capital, and in the very proximity of th e place where he put up during his short stay in Delhi, a new temple was inaug≠urated and opened for the public. Apart from the beauty and grandeur of its structure combining modern art with the ancient, t he special significance of this temple lies in its very cosmopolitan and universal outlook being lef t open to A LL classes, the highest and the lowest, including even the unt ouchables. It seems thus to m ark the adv ent of a new era of religious tolerance that breaks all the rigid barriers of caste and creed, admitting the right of every human being to enter the House of God. 



   Although not having any external connection with Baba, the inau≠guration and openin g of such an unique temple at th e exact tim e of the appearance of a Sp iritual Master on the spot, whose gospel of teach≠ing imbibes the sam e underlying principle of a brotherhood of hu≠manity irrespective of caste, colour or creed, connotes, if anything, the subtle working and influence of the powers that m ould the destinies of mankind in thes e timesóexample again of the tim ely and significant movements of Baba. 

   We finish this instalment with a description of our group 's visit to the tomb of H azrat Nizamuddin, in the words of an Am erican lady who accompanied the party:

 "An example of the Master, Meher Baba's spiritual way of working while on this tour, was witnessed during our visit to the tomb of Hazrat Nizamuddin, a great Saint who has been buried outside of Delhi, which ostens ibly might seem like the visit of thousands of other travellers to th is holy shrine, but turned out to be most unusual due to Baba's presence. 

A young man of studious ap≠pearance and f ine features, who seemed to be the attendant in this holy place, show ed us around. W e noticed that his demeanor was not like the ordinary attendant, for he had such true feeling for the sanctity of this spiritual environment which conveyed a living quality instead of the reliquary of a de ad saint. As we passed by a pool within the en≠closure, a num ber of ascetics were seen seated on the terraces above the water, and one or two of them asked us for alms. Baba, however, singled out a m an, clad in rags, who evidently was n ot privileged to be seated among the ascetics. He stayed most inconspicuously in a ra ther dark corner, yet one would have thought him a begga r; but, as we passed, he did not ask for m oney. Baba bestowed upon him a glance, such as we who are wit h the Master know so well its regenerating effect. When we cam e to the gateway on our way out, this lone m an was standing a little distance away and rapture was in his eyes as he gazed at Baba; it was a spiritual under≠standing which needed no words. Baba, in gesture to one of the gate-keepers, inquired who this man was. And the reply came, "He is o nly a m endi≠cant." But I could not but feel that Baba perceived the soul of this m an beneath his ragged exterior. Just as we were returning to the bus, the young attendant inqu ired of one of Baba's disciples who Baba was, as evidently he could feel that Baba was not like the many other visitors to the place. Although on this part of the trip, B aba 's identity was not to be revealed to outsiders, the disciple was surprised to see th e Master nodding to him in a ssent; so it was told that he was Hazrat Meher Baba. Soon the reason for this departure from the otherwise strict injunction, came to light. This young m an was the son of a sain t who is acknow≠ledged by m any, who lives a completely secluded life, and sees few. What was so extraordinary was that, due to Baba 's presence, all twenty of us w ere permitted to se e the saint in his cell-like chamber. He seldom eats o r sleeps, and his only garment was a blanket. 



   In the semi-darkness with light seeming to shine u pon his face, we could see his noble features with grey beard and eyes that appeared to gaze transcendentally on paradise. To me who had come from the West his counterpart had been only seen in the inspired Russian icons and Italian paintings of the Prophets of old. Why should one believe, how≠ever, that such great souls lived only in the centuries past?

    The recollection came swiftly to my mind that Baba had foretold us, before starting, that we might meet a saint that day, but we had no idea when or where, and our driving around Delhi was rather extensive. Later Baba informed us th at this evolved soul was on the fifth plane of consciousness and did great spiritual work in c onnection with Baba's own. I could not help but f eel that the silent interchange that passed between the Master an d the saint as w e stood for a m oment in the secluded stone-chamber, was one of the underlying reasons w hy Baba passed through Delhi." 
