The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern India and their Hagiology 
BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 
The Azhwars (pronounced Awzhwars), or Saints of Sri Vaishnavas, were the exponents of the Triune Monism and the Divine Love of the Upanishads, i.e., Visishta-dvaitism. These Sri Vaishnavas are also called Ramanujas, the followers of the great Acharya Ramanujas, who was that 'glorious spiritual reservoir' into which flowed the wisdom of Saints and Sages of Southern India. Those Saints are called Azhvars (meaning literally, those drowned in or maddened with God-Love) and the Sages, Acharyas.
 The Azhvars or Saints answer to the description given by the American thinker Emerson in his essay, "The Oversoul": "A certain tendency to insan≠ity has always attended the opening of the religious sense in men, as if they had been blasted with excess of light. The trances of Socrates, the union of Plotinus, the vision of Porphyry, the conversion of Paul, the aurora of Boeme, the convulsions of George Fox and his Quakers, the illumination of Swedenborg are of this kind. What was in the case of these remarkable persons a ravishment, has, in innumerable instances in common life, been ex≠hibited in less striking manner. Every≠where the history of religion betrays a tendency to enthusiasm. The rapture of the Moravian and Quietist; the opening of the internal sense of the word in the language of the new Jerusalem Church; the revival of the Calvinistic Churches; the experiences of the Methodists are varying forms of that shudder of awe and delight with which the individual soul always mingles with the Universal Soul." 
The Azhvar Saints belong to all grades of society, and mere birth was never an obstacle to their elevation to Sainthood by the path of 'Love to God.' This reveals to us indisputably 

the Catholic feature of early Brah≠manism in Southern India. Thus says S. Johnson: "It was a redeeming element of Hindu Caste itself, that it constituted every Saint an incarnation of Brahma for the preservation of the world, in virtue of his fulfillment of the ideal of Sainthood. The equal opportunity, even within the limits of a hereditary class, was at least the recognition, that fresh access to union with Deity by discipline and faith could never be wholly fore≠closed. Nor was any past form of Sainthood regarded as permanent possession, either of supreme and final virtue, or of invincible authority. Its throne was held provisionally and liable to pass to a stronger master in the sphere of devotion. This democratic element in Brahmanical holiness has already attractted our interest. Under favouring circumstances, it would have reconciled incarnation with liberty and progress."
   Who are these Azhvars or Saints? Are these souls celestials directly emanating from God, or are they of terrestrial kind, who, having passed through bondage, were raised to Sainthood so as to serve as teachers for humanity? The latter explanation seems to us to be more probable. 
   Lord Shri Krishna himself says in his Gita, "Many are the births that have been passed by Me and thee, O Arjuna. I know them all, whilst thou knowest not, O scorcher of foes" (IV. 5). Again he says, "Whenever, O descendent of Bharata, there is decline of Dharma* and rise of Adharma**, then I body myself forth...for the protection of virtue, and for the removal of vice, and for the establishment of Dharma..." 
(VII. 8). This is also stated in Naradiya Srimushna Mahatmya. It is clear that the great Azhvars have been chosen by God for the benefit of mankind. It decidedly proves their release from the state of bondage. It gives us hope. This Grace of God is certainly a covenant to us. God in His mercy assures us that every soul now in bondage is ultimately bound to arrive at Sainthood even as our holy Azhvars, who came out of ordinary men, attained Sainthood and Godhood. 
   It is true that every soul is of God. But in the case of 
 
AzhvaróSavioursóGod enters into them in a special manner, infusing the all-comprehending wisdom (Jnana) of the Sage and the all-enfolding Love (Bhakti) of the Saint.
   It is interesting to note that even in spiritually developed souls like the Azhvars there were periods of distress when they bitterly complained of the same, in their outpourings. They worked hard and were amply rewarded in the end. They approached the well of Divinity with purity of heart and humility. They drank the spiritual waters, and actuated by Divine Love, gave the nectar to thirsty souls. According to them, God is immanent and not only transcendent; and this supernatural conception is really a miracle. Everything cannot be physi≠cally proved. Self-realization cannot be proved in a physical laboratory. As Count Leo Tolstoy said: "The shore is God, the course tradition, the oars are the free-will given meÖÖ" We must follow in the footsteps of great Saints which alone would enable us to know the Truth. Are we not successfully trying to realize the Truth (oneness in manyness) by following the greatest Saint of the age, Shri Meher Baba? With faith and patience we have therefore to approach the supernatural with the help of a Perfected One. Such Perfected Ones were in the past. And we should with humility, learn something about their holy lives. 
   Amiel says: "The supernatural is mir≠acle, and miracle is an objective phen≠omena independent of all preceding causality. Now, miracle thus understood cannot be proved experimentally, and besides, the subjective phenomena, far more important than all the rest, are left out of account in the definition. Men will not see that miracle is a perception of the soul, a vision of the Divine behind nature; a psychical crisis, an≠alogous to that of Aeneas on the last day of Troy, which reveals to us the heavenly powers prompting and direct≠ing human action. For the indifferent, there are no miracles. It is only the religious souls who are capable to recognize the figure of God in certain given facts." 
We shall narrate succinctly the life of a dozen holy Azhvars who, as sacred guardians of 

religious Truths, helped mankind in who never let religion itself die out their onward march  on the Path, and among men. 
( To be continued ) 