The Need for a Master 

BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A., Ph. D. (London )* 

The human soul finds itself in a world which it does not completely understand and where it does not recognize its own true nature. It identifies itself with the limited indivi≠duality or finite consciousness; and its actions are impelled by sanskaras which use the mind for finding expression and fulfilment. In life, the ego tries to adjust itself to the world, or adapt the world to itself. But as long as the mind is clouded by past sanskaras, its actions are not free and inevitably lead to conflict, chaos and suffering. Human suffering would thus have been end-less had it not been for the help of the Perfect Masters who have Self-knowledge and are free. 

    The Perfect Master imparts light to the groping soul and gives a new direction to life. The aspirants who have met Shri Meher Baba are always conscious of a reorientation of life; for his contact effects the entire over≠hauling and reconstruction of the mind. 

such complete overhauling and reconst≠itution of the mind is indispensable for right search. There cannot be right search without some perception of the goal; and there cannot be perception of the goal unless there is profound disturbance in the normal limited outlook which, owing to previous sanskaras, is false and binding. 

    Some aspirants rely solely on their conscience for guidance in life. But the conscience of most persons is often just a collection of prejudices and opinions which they absorb for the social atmos≠phere; it is at best based on experience and is therefore sanskaric, limited and binding; and even where the aspirant has begun to think for himself, he is likely to come to wrong conclusions owing to the operation of sanskaras. He may embrace a false view firmly and cling to self-delusion without knowing his error; and he may take very long to realize his limitations unless he is lifted out of his groove by the Grace of the 


Master. It is true that the Source of Light is within; but as it is hidden by the cloud of sanskaras, the Light does not always come through in its purity. It is, therefore, not sufficiently effective in guiding human search. On the other hand, the Light coming from the Master comes through an unclouded mind and, when it is received by the finite consciousness of the soul, it helps the soul to bring out the Light from within. 

    The awakening which many aspir≠ants experience by coming into contact with Shri Meher Baba is due to the divine touch which he gives to the inner Self. It is a mistake to imagine that the Master works only from without in a semi-mechanical fashion. By the Divine Love which Shri Meher Baba pours into the aspirant, he gets into his heart and works from there as an abiding source of happiness and inspiration. The effect of the contact with the Master, however, depends also upon the receptivity of the aspirant. Spiritual progress is thus most rapid where the soul, which is ready through its past efforts, has the good fortune to get the help of a Perfect Master. 

There are some who sincerely believe that a Master is not necessary for spiritual life. This view is erron≠eous, and overlooks the significance of many ordinary facts concerning the process of learning. A child has to be taught how to walk, talk, dress, read and write before it learns to do these things for itself. Even for adults it is always easier to assimilate the truths imparted by others than to discover and realize them independently. This will be seen in practical life as well as in the pursuit of scientific knowledge. It took many years of work for a scientific genius like Newton to discover and establish the Law of Gravitation; but today even ordinary persons can understand it in much less time. In the same way it took a mechanical genius to invent a motor engine; but even ordi≠nary persons can understand and control its mechanism when it is explained to them. In short, human progress in the various departments of life would have been considerably less, had it not been for the capacity of man to profit 



by the experience and understanding of others. The same is true of spiritual life. The need for a Master is even greater in spiritual life, because ordinary man is at the mercy of ever increasing Sanskaras. His ignorance leads to ignorant actions which further fortify ignorance. For example, if he develops a craving for wine or greed for money, with the lapse of time he becomes more and more a slave of his desire, and clings more and more firmly to the wrong belief that it is absolutely necessary for his happiness. Attach≠ment makes him feel helpless and dependent upon external circumstances. It is true that the suffering which a man experiences, as a result of his ignorant actions, often provokes thinking, and compels him to revalue everything in a new Light. But the impact of the suffering is not in itself sufficient to lead him to wisdom, because the mind has a general tendency to attribute all suffering to unfavourable circums≠tances rather than to its own assump≠tions. Man, therefore, needs guidance from the Master who can effectively impress  upon him the true cause of suffering which is wrong valuation. When he is thus turned to-wards the Light and yearns with all his heart for the Light, every experience clarifies and strengthens his spiritual intuitions. The Master, however, is necessary not only to initiate the aspirant into the Path but also to secure his steady pro≠gress; for he is likely to slip and fall into the abyss of ignorance again, un≠less he is constantly warned and en≠couraged by the Master.

    The greatest hindrance in spiritual life is egoism which increases not only through bad actions but also through good actions. No amount of  'thinking' is in itself sufficient to purify con≠sciousness from egoism. Just as a man cannot stand upon his own shoulders, the ego cannot annihilate itself. It feeds upon everything it does, and grows through its actions and achievements. Complete self-surrender is the only way to oust the ego from conscious≠ness. The Master alone can, by using the various circumstances of life, lift from the mind of the aspirant the woeful burden of egoism. The aspirant cannot independently 



shake it off even if he wants to. 

With the help of the Master the aspirant cannot only eliminate egoism but also develop divine qualities. The spirit of love and selfless service which Shri Meher Baba awakens is due to his divine intervention and the supreme insight which he has in the working of the human mind. The impersonal path of seeking the abstract Truth, or the un≠manifest, is bound to be mainly intellectual and, therefore, does not provide sufficiently for the develop≠ment of the heart or the perfection of activity. The Path of the Master, however, is rich with potentialities for the expression of love and action. And, further, the aspirant can always depend upon the knowledge, love and power of the Master who sees him safely through the pitfalls and the dangers of the Path. 

In spiritual life, teaching can in no way be an adequate substitute for the Teacher. Teaching has undoubtedly an important function in spiritual life, but it cannot give the same inspiration as personal contact with the Master. A man can construct  his ideal out of what he has read in the books, but it can hardly affect his life seriously. And even when the ideal is born of his own speculation, it is bound to be deficient owing to the limitations of his experience. Further, though the ideal may seem to him as being reason-able, it still comes to him as a mere pos≠sibility, and, therefore, remain inef≠fective. It may appeal to him as desirable, but he continues to doubt its actual practicability in life. 

In fact, to set up a conception as an ideal often brings about more or less permanent despair about realizing it in practical life. The ideal appeals to the imagination as an inviting possibility. But the aspirant who relies only on himself for realizing the possibility also knows, or will discover, his own weak≠ness, and is, therefore, unable to have sufficient self-confidence. The ideal is for him an intellectual theory or merely the hope of imagination, while his limitations are a matter of experience in everyday life. He is, therefore, likely to be over-powered by these limitations and come to look upon the distance between the actuality 



and the ideal as unbridgable. This means acquiescence in the actual, and ends in the cessation of serious endeavour, although the aspirant may continue to harbour idle longing for the ideal. 

On the other hand, contact with a Perfect Master inspires confidence, since, in him, the ideal of the imagination is apprehended not as a theoretical possibility but as a realized actuality. The speculative ideal is only a construction of ideas, while the Master represents Reality and therefore has all the Infinite Powers of the life-force at his disposal. Contact with Shri Meher Baba not only keeps spiritual aspiration alive and intense, but in. spires active effort, because he is the ideal which has become Real. Knowledge of the reality of the Ideal is a much greater stimulus than a vague hope. 

    For spiritual transformation, the help of the Master is thus much more impor- tant than mere speculation or the read≠ing of scriptures. The doctrine that the Light can only come from within and not from the Master presupposes the "dire heresy of separateness." The divi≠sion of within and without is based upon duality which is created by the false identification with the body. The Master is and knows himself to be that Unity of life in which there is no division. To externalize the Master is, therefore, to identify him falsely with nothing but the form. Really speaking the Master is neither merely internal nor merely externalóbut both. He is the all-pervading Divine Life. He takes form only in order to help aspirants towards the goal of Truth-conscious≠ness. By meditating on the Master, the aspirant is generally transformed into his likeness, because the mind becomes like that which it contemplates. And just as one torch sets aflame another torch, the Light which the Master brings imparts Truth to the seeker. 