 
You Must Believe It
BY  DR.  ABDUL  GHANI MUNSIFF

 
HAZRAT NAJMUDDIN KUBRA,
the Master of the time, had a favourite disciple, who also happened to be the spiritual guide to the then Khalifa of Baghdad. This disciple, once while  lecturing to a gathering, used the simile of a hen hatching eggs, in order to explain the spiritual relationship between a  Master and his disciple. He said, ''A Spiritual Master looks after the spiritual well-being of all types of disciples under his  care,  similar to a hen hatching any variety of eggs, put under its protective wings. Once hatched the different varieties of eggs will evince different characteristics inherent in them. The canary birds will fly in the air, the hen chickens will scramble about on land and the ducklings will naturally take to swimming in water. I too am a spiritual duckling swimming everlastingly on the ocean of divinity.''
Someone reported the  lecture to Hazrat Najmuddin and said, ''Your disciple compared you—a Master—to a hatching hen." The Master replied, ''My disciple surely has been very indiscreet in the choice of a simile; he  shall pay for it by being drowned in water."
 
Being as he was, a spiritual tutor to the Khalifa of Baghdad, the disciple had free access at all times to the palace of the King. Once on a visit to the palace the disciple learned that the Khalifa was away and may return after a while. He decided to await the return of the King and in the meanwhile he strolled into the King's bedchamber and made himself comfortable thereon. The extraordinary comfort of  the royal bed soon wafted the  disciple into a sweet  slumber.  The favourite wife of the Khalifa happened to enter the bedcham- ber for an afternoon nap and mistaking the occupant of the bed to be the King himself, laid  herself down quietly by his side. A short while afterwards the Khalifa appeared on the scene  and finding the two in such an incriminating situation the fire of his ire and jealousy was terribly aroused. He decided to wreak vengeance for the misuse of his faith and trust in the disciple and ordered his courtiers to take the disciple—his spiritual guide—for an outing in a river-boat with in- structions to drown him in mid- stream. The royal orders were literally carried out and the
 

innocent disciple met his watery death true to the prophecy of his Master Hazrat Najmuddin.
When the queen was tackled on the subject she confessed her unhappy mistake and vouched for the innocence of the disciple. At this unexpected revelation the Khalifa felt greatly aggrieved and repented his hasty and cruel action in the matter. To atone for this unwarranted atrocity perpetrated by him, the King approached Hazrat Najmuddin and laying before him a large sum of money and sword, said, "Here is the blood-money for the unmerited murder of your disciple or my head instead whichever you please.''
Hazrat Najmuddin was in a state of jalal (divine glory) at the time. He gave vent to his wrath saying, “Do you think my disciple's life was so cheap as to be exchanged for gold or your head? No, his murder can only be avenged by my head first, then your head, then the heads of all the notables, sages and saints of the time." These names he began to recount one after another, until he named even Fariduddin Attar, the spiritual chargeman of Bagh- dad. When Hazrat Najmuddin had uttered only the first syllable (Bagh) of the word Baghdad a disciple close by interrupted him by putting his hand across his mouth saying, "Please do not destroy
 

Baghdad, the city of our revered saints."
In course of time every word of this prophecy came true. Changiz Khan, the Mangolian warrior, swooped down with his murderous hordes on to Central Asia overrunning Persia, Arabia and Asia Minor, This irresistible invasion was responsible for a good deal of slaughter and pillage incomparable in history and it accounted for the heads of all the saints, sages and notables enum- erated by Hazrat Najmuddin.
When laying siege to the City of Baghdad Changiz Khan's armies made repeated onslaughts but every time they retired un- successful. The reason  given being that the spiritual chargeman of Baghdad, Fariduddin Attar, every time hearing of the impend- ing attack by the invaders used to put his wooden drinking bowl upside down and this act was instrumental in making the City of Baghdad invisible to the eyes of the invading army. Changiz Khan when informed of this situation, decided to lead the army himself and vowed that he would never return without sacking the city once for all. This time also Fariduddin Attar in order to make the city invisible, was on the point of upturning his wooden bowl when the immortal Iliyas (Prophet Khizr) prevented him from doing so by catching hold of his arms
 

 
and said, "The destruction of this City is divinely decreed and not even your miracle can do any- thing to stop it. You are also expected to prepare yourself for laying down your head."
Fariduddin Attar resigned himself to the divine decree, and did not resist Changiz Khan's armies destroying nearly half the City of Baghdad and even took toll of the head of the famous saint Fariduddin Attar, thus fulfilling the fantastic prophecy of Hazrat Najmuddin Kubra.
It is rather unbelievable but all the same quite true how Masters utilize insignificant events round about them for achieving colossal results on the
 
material plane. The historical events referred to above took place and developed with clock- wise precision and were of such far-reaching results and conse- quences that it is hard to believe that the raving of a Master over the death of his beloved disciple can be responsible for such upheavals in history. This universal method of working to- day can hardly be denied at least by the disciples of Shri Meher Baba whose spiritual working on the material plane for the spiritual upliftment of humanity is of such a far-reaching character too wonderful, and impossible to believe. Something of this will be divulged to the world at its proper time.
