THE prophecy of Merlin, whose name is associated with King Arthur in the mythology of ancient Britain, concerning the coming of the world Saviour, has a signifi­cant parallel to the recent prediction in the London newspaper The People in December 1934, of a new World Figure, who would arise in 1941, when "for the first time in modern history, Democracy will have found its one superb leader" .... His work will, the article emphasised, arouse tremendous opposition but he will win in a dramatic way and sweep the board with his opponents". Thus his work will succeed because he will be above nationality and above sect." "His knowledge will be colossal, and his judgments as nearly perfect as we can imagine. 
In everything he does there will be this uncanny accuracy, and it is possible that those who come into contact with him, will feel that they have never before met anyone so sweet of temper, so gracious in manner, or so good to look upon. Wherever he goes, the common people will love him and follow him." This prediction is based upon the conjunction of five planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Venus and Mercury. 
The drastic reform of social conditions, is also predicted, as well as the upliftment of the status of women, all the direct result of this new leader's work, which will furthermore emerge in the unifi­cation of the nations. 
Merlin's ancient prophecy also refers to the influence of Jupiter and Venus, Saturn 
and Mercury, and some of the constellations and the signs of the Zodiac, to indicate the state of the world and of men's minds and feelings at the time of the appearance of the World Saviour. He employs symbols in expres­sing his prophecy of the future, for symbols are the common language of the ancients and survive from prehistoric times in unbroken continuity, surviving to-day in heraldry and in some forms of worship and ceremonial. 
Merlin's prophecy refers to One who shall conquer the creative energy within the cosmos, "grasping the lion within the earth". Thus we may look to its fulfilment in the age of the manifestation of the work of the World Saviour, who shall direct upward into finer more spiritual channels, the animal creative energy of the ordinary life. 
Merlin refers to "gold" and the "brightness of gold" to indicate the highest spirituality manifesting as the divine power in a "God-Man". Merlin himself is credited with a knowledge of the forces which control nature, and legends and 
stories indicate that he was a yogi of considerable power in the occult world, even guiding the great Arthur himself through various initiations in the story of the "Knights of the Round Table". 
Nevertheless, this interpretation of the signs of the coming age is more interior than of the writer of The People, as the following extracts from Merlin's Prophecy indicate:— 
''A man shall grasp the lion within the earth, and the brightness of gold shall blind the eyes of those who behold it." (The Saviour of mankind directs and controls the vital energy, which the lion, as King of Beasts, symbolises, and those who behold His spiritual nature are dazzled and blinded by His Glory.) 
“Roots and branches shall change places and the newness of the world shall be as a miracle," [As trees by their extremities are rooted in the earth, and through this are earthly in every part, in the same manner, divine natures are rooted by their summits in the One (Proclus). Thus man’s earthly nature shall be regenerated.] 
