 
RELIGION in its abstract and æsthetic sense, is the solution of the riddle of life and as such a synonym for spirituality; while in the commonly accepted sense of the term it is a bewildering jumble of dogmas, ceremonials and customs. Spiritual Masters pri­marily deal with the former aspect of religion and the latter is nothing but an aftermath of their manifestatton on earth. It has been very aptly said, "Democracy is the flattery of the common people and religion is the metaphysics of the masses.'' 
The world overlooks the im­portant aspect of a prophet's mission in life, that of making a few attuned souls spiritually perfect, and also that of giving the whole of creation a universal spiritual push. Unhappily, the manifestation of a Spiritual Personality is erroneously asso­ciated with the founding of a religion of dogmas  and ceremon­ies and this in all seriousness and faith is taken to be the raison d'être of a Master’s appearance on earth. 
The analogy of the situation comes very near to that of an industrial magnate, who has piled up his comfortable millions, by utilizing all of the tricks of the trade. Feeling very grateful for his unique good fortune, he (the millionaire) very often sincerely feels for all those not so happily placed. In his altruistic fervour to ameliorate the plight of suffering mankind, he comes out with a helpful message in the form of a book, detailing all the ways and means which if acted upon in earnest, would bring the millen­nium experienced by him within the reach of all and sundry. This does not however involve the question of earnings—the millions —being shared with everybody. That is a legacy for those who deserve according to their past and present connections with him. The simile might be stretched ad infinitum, but suffice it to say, Spiritual Masters likewise, during their life-time bequeath the spiritual heritage to all those connected and deserving, and for others leave behind a bookful of guidance promising the desired result. 

Spinosa has correctly probed the situation when he said that, "All Scripture was written primarily for an entire people, and secondarily for the whole human race; consequently its contents must necessarily be adopted, as far as possible, to the understanding of the masses. Scripture does not explain things by their secondary causes, but only narrates them in the order and style which has most power to move men, and especially uneducated men, to devotion ... Its object is not to convince the reason, but to attract and lay hold of the imagination." This aspect therefore shapes out to be the religion for the masses, bringing up a host of concomitant factors into prominence, viz., the Church, the dogma and the priest. 
In the purview of this article it is intended to discuss the exoteric public as to where their religion of rituals and ceremonies lands them in the course of their spiritual progress. The Masters inculcate spiritual truths, point out the goal of life, and lay down certain principles of action, leaving ample scope for individual enterprise and aptitude. The Spiritual Masters know full well that it is the individual religion of a man, manufactured by himself on the anvil of personal experience and discrimination that brings about his salvation and not the one imbibed with mother's milk. Such being the case the scheme works out well during the life-time of a Master, as the man outside awakens for others the man inside. But no sooner the physical presence of a Master is relegated to the background of time, the rigidity of the petrified form of religion—the Church, mosque or temple—begins to assert itself. The active side of it, instead of expressing itself in a conscious effort at grappling with Truth, begins to manifest itself as bigotry and fanaticism and the passive side thereof, which is peace and contentment, takes the form of apathy and indifference. 
The churches, temples and 

mosques, symbolising rituals and dogmas, claim allegiance from people who are incapable of thinking for themselves and who leave the question of their spiritual well-being in the hands of professionals. The attachment to the ceremonial side of religion noticeable everywhere is either due to fear of eternal damnation or force of habit. A temporary break in this, resulting in a feeling of void of some kind, is interpreted as Love for God, or actuated by a desire for social prominence as a free-thinker—a feature peculiar to the East. The resultant product is a perfect hypocrite, worse than an atheist, who it may be said to his credit, is at least true to himself. 
The religion of dogmas and rituals, has been tried and found wanting as it does not satisfy the craving of the soul. It may have succeeded in moulding the peoples of the earth into different social and political groups but its moral and spiritual worth is almost negligible. A Philosopher has said: "When mere creeds or ceremonies usurp priority over moral excellence as a test of religion, religion has dis­appeared. Creed and ritual have again replaced the good life; and instead of men bound together by religion, they are divided into a thousand sects; and all manner of 'pious nonsense' is inculcated as 'a sort of heavenly court service by means of which one may win through flattery the favour of the ruler of heaven'. The nadir of perversion is reached when the clergy, whose function it is to console and guide a harrasscd humanity with religious faith, hope and charity, are made the tools of theological obscurantism and polit­ical oppression." And who can to­day deny this unhappy state of affairs throughout the world and India in particular? 
Psychologically ritualistic reli­gion as represented by the Church is another manifestation of herd instinct in living beings. In the lower order of creation such as animals, the herd instinct is manifest physically through the formation of groups and species; while man a highly evolved and rational being, not satisfied with merely a communal and social life would even insist on a similarity of thinking and a common outlook. Symptomatic of this instinct of self-preservation, is 

the manifestation of hero worship latent in man whereby humanity all along in the history of the world, has attached its faith and loyalty to a single spiritual personality and in the event of this wisdom and judgment being challenged, has resorted to most sanguine crusades against the so-called devil—the opposite force— which in fact has had existence nowhere outside of themselves. What other meaning could be ascribed to the proselytising propa­ganda by the followers of different religions, and particularly the missionary activities of the Christian World? A set of rituals and dogmas are bartered, for a feeling of safety which numerical strength naturally gives. 
When it is said that the spiritual importance of rituals and dogmas is nil, it would naturally be argued whether or not the spiritual Masters have been responsible for the making of all the recognized religions. The answer can be 'yes' and 'no'. The realized Masters being fully alive to the various degrees of make-up and prepared-ness—moral and intellectual—of humanity at large, gave each one according to his ability and promised each one according to his labour, although they loved all and worked for all equally as they find their own selves in all. Alongside of their secondary activities, that of restoring social and political order, they have very ably but subtly propounded spiritual Truths, which only a few try to probe, practise and achieve the reward thereof. The Masters were never in doubt as to the sheer impossibility of mass production in the spiritual domain by means of cults, religions, organizations and societies. Hence the most convenient makeshift was the idea of writing post-mortem cheques (the revealed books) for tempting the people to be good and righteous in this life. 
This state of affairs not being satisfactory to critical and probing minds, the outcome is, that estab­lished creeds are being challenged and the masses, instinctively sensing the position, have allowed themselves a religious holiday. This is the situation that is con­fronting all the recognized relig­ions of the world to-day although vested interests are exerting their best to stem the tide which is threatening to sweep them off their feet. The fight is almost 

a hopeless one as the odds are against. The tribunal of world opinion has begun to dictate in no unmistakable terms and demands a complete overhaul of their religious outfit. Everywhere the educated and the intellectuals are trying to read new meaning into dogmas and rituals; the reformists are exerting their utmost to purge religion of the later accretions in the form of meaningless and expensive customs and cere­monies. 
The Mohemedan world is giving up the veil (purdha) which, after centuries of compulsory incarcerations, they have dis­covered to their utter dismay, had no clearly defined religious sanction behind it. The question of untouchability amongst Hinuds has assumed serious proportions. The enlightened minds amongst them have already revolted against this colossal atrocity perpetrated on a section of humanity in the name of religion. The world is looking aghast at the attitude of the Christian world in replacing the transcendent Truth 'Love thy neighbour as thy own self' by the cult of the armed might. 
Spiritual Masters believe in individual religion suited to one's capacities and preparedness and according to them there are as many paths as there are human beings. Hence plethora of rituals and ceremonies is unequivocally discountenanced by them, as it allows no room for individual touch. Too much attention to ceremonials and dogmas makes the process purely mechanical and relegates Truth to the background. It is like loosing the forest for the trees. The main issue, which is knowledge of Self is thus side-tracked and it is on this account that Masters prefer an irreligious but moral man to a religious but immoral one. 
The very fact that there are disturbing factors at work throughout the world and partic­ularly in the domain of religion which looms large over every­thing and governs directly or indirectly all the phases of human activity, behind it all is the silent prayer of humanity for a better state of things; and according to the law of supply and demand it augurs well for the future, as this desire for change may be a pointer to the second advent of Christ, Mohomed, or Krishna, which to the panicky and grief 

stricken world is long overdue. 
The Spiritual possibility of the time, Meher Baba says, “Dogmas, creeds and conventional ideas of heaven and hell and of sin are perversions of Truth, and confuse and bewilder the mind. 
Rituals and ceremonies, instit­uted by the priest-ridden churches, have concentrated on outward forms, and have ignored the essence of spiritual life. The elementary virtues—love, obedi­ence, humility and sincerity—are represented by allegorical statues, and the way to Eternal Life is forgotten in their sumptuous and magnificient temples. Man seeks life and is given a stone. 
Dogmas and doctrines, rites and ceremonies, do not constitute true religion. To realize God in every phase of life—in art, science, beauty, nature—that is RELIGION”. 
