
What Should a Laymanís Attitude be towards Saints 
BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 
Ba khuda masti kun-o 
Ba awliya hoshiyar bash. 

(With God the Absolute, do what you dare; But in dealing with saints  forsooth beware.) 
THE above Sufi couplet throws a flood of light, on what oneís attitude should be towards saints. In spite of the inexorable functioning of the Law of Causation, it does not frighten people so much, because the possibility of ultimate retribution therein, is looked upon as a future eventuality and not a thing that should be allowed to embitter the present. It cannot be denied that in oneís relationship with Godóthe Absolute, people are prone to take all sorts of liberties and the thought of behaving in any way wrong, does not bother them at all. If a man be a theist or an atheist, agnostic or a cynic, believer or an heathen, it is every-day experience that Godóthe Absolute does not withold from any, His blessings and favours such as light, air, life and health. On the contrary, one is surprised to find that non≠believers very often, are much more successful in lifeómaterial, than the believers. Hence, in oneís actions, good or bad, criminal or righteous, pious or blasphemous, one feels comparatively safe, as the prospect of immediate reaction to such attitudes is not there. 
The reason for this state of affairs is that the whole evolutionary process, atomic or cosmic, particular or general, individual or collective, is governed by a cosmic law which is synonymous with Godóthe Absoluteóthe Imper≠sonal. Not only the different states and stages of the evolutionary struggle as represented in the stone, the vegetation and the animal are governed therby, 

but even the so-called human beings who are ignorant or who refuse to be aroused to their original state and pristine glory, come under the operation of this cosmic law. 
This situation however under≠goes a radical change when the process of involutionóthe return to the original sourceóbegins to operate. No sooner a human being begins to question the why and wherefore of existence and insists upon an answer to these questions in this very life, then in his case the process of involution (the return journey), may be said to have begun. And this involu≠tionary process comes under the direct influence and jurisdiction of the personal Gods, viz., the Prophets, Avatars or Saints living in flesh on earth. 
The evolutionary process is involuntary aEd proceeds un≠consciously and the involu≠tionary process, though volun≠tarily and consciously undertaken, is yet a very painful affair and fraught with dangers and pitfalls when attempted alone. It is for this reason, the return journey (involution) of the individual soul to the over-soul is attended with unimagined trials and tribu≠lations, which very few survive unless helped and guided by living Masters. 
The question here arises as why only living Masters are capable of doing and undoing things and not the disembodied ones. The reason being that after disembodiment, Perfect Masters automatically become one or get identified with the cosmic law of evolution and cease to release and operate the active principle, which sets the involutionary struggle in motion. For instance a magistrate or a judge after retirement from active service continues to know and under≠stand law as ever before, but the power to execute or translate the same into action is absent. Similarly disembodied souls of the Perfect Ones are as spiritually alive as ever but the power and authority to do spiritual good to others, which they had in their life-time, is not there. Hazrat Naqshband raises this question in a Persian quartrain when he says: "How long you'll waste your 
precious years, In pilgrimage to tombs of this 
and that; Against a thousand lionsódead 
and gone More spiritually alive is an 

Adept's cat." It should not however be forgot≠ten that the spiritual blessedness and grace to the world of such saints even after disembodiment continues to influence and affect the universe whether they are invoked or not. 
When people say they have derived benefit from the Samadhi or the tomb of a certain saint, it is almost always material benefit that accrues from such a source. And this benefit is in proportion to one's devotion and faith towards the personality behind the shrine. lt is simply the reaction of one's mind to influences and impressions good or bad that brings about a result desirable or unhappy. The shrine of the saint only serves as a medium for the rousing of the latent atrength and potentiality of the mind and the result, very often material in character and form, is happy or otherwise in accordance with the susceptibility of the mind, to such reactions and impressions. The following inci≠dent in the life of a Muslim saint will illustrate the point under discussion. 
Once a man known as Karim≠uddin Dahriya (an atheist) called on Ghaousali Shah Qalander who was at the time seated near the shrine of Makhdoom Ali Ahmed Sabir of Kalyar. After indulging in an uninvited sermon on the futility of worshipping the tombs of departed saints, this atheist, even went to the length of demon≠strating his non-belief in the spiritual potency of the departed saints by desecrating the tomb of Ali Ahmed Sabir, before he could be prevented from perpetrating this sacrilege. 
Ghaousali Shah chased away this atheist and after his departure began to bathe the shrine with a few bucketful of water. When the devotees of the enshirned saint inquired the reason of this unusual bath, he, fearing breach of peace, tactfully explained away the situation by saying that a monkey happened to urinate on the shrine. 
Once while relating this inci≠dent to his disciples, Ghaousali Shah said, ''The Saint Makhdoom Ali Ahmed Sabir has not allowed any the slightest misbehaviour on the part of visitors to go unpunished; but this Karimuddin (atheist) was made of a sterner stuff and never 

believed in the saintliness of any man however great. If he had in him even the slightest suspicion of fear or faith in such matters, the reaction would certainly have followed. But all need not and dare not emulate successfully Karimuddin the aethist, and so much the better for their ultimate good and spiritual benefit. It is truly said, 'If you have faith then even the stone is a god'." No doubt there have been a few notable instances of people, deriving even spiritual benefit from the souls of departed saints. This happens only in special cases, where the earthly connection of the receiver and the giver of spiritual benefit has been cut short by unavoidable circumstances. But such cases are rare and far betweenómore an exception than the rule. 
When such is the spiritual potency and influence of en≠shrined saints, it can be imagined what must be the atmosphere round about a living saint. Treating the subject from the analogy of electricity, the diff≠erence in the spiritual potency of buried saints and living saints will be made much clearer. 
Scientists will tell you that the indirect (alternate) current of electricity is much more danger≠ous than the direct current. The indirect current when touched, very often kills which the direct current seldom does. And further the earthing process that is the burying of a copper wire in the earth serves to neutralise the extra load on the current, with the magnetism of the earth, thereby making the machinery and the surroundings comparatively im≠mune from damage and harm. 
Similarly the spiritual powers of the Masters after disembodi- ment are merged (neutralised) with the universal and infinite powers of the Almighty God, which sustain unceasingly the process of evolution. But the living Masters are the spiritual power-houses round which the atmospherics (Tajalliyat-shaktis) are much more active and powerful. 
Spiritual Masters are con- cerned with and emanate both the spiritual currents (Tajalliyat-shaktis) direct or indirect The direct one is their divine aspect of Jamal (Divine Beatitude) which takes cognisance of devotion, Bhakti and love on the part of the seeker and  

rewards him in proportion to the sincerity and intensity of longing. While the indirect one is the aspect of Jalal (Divine Glory) which responds quickly and irrevo≠cably to any mischievous act or intention towards them. And the power-housesóthe Spiritual Masters, though presenting these two aspects in their lives on earth, are yet above and beyond them. It is in this sense, the Sufis say that Spiritual Masters neither bless nor curse anyone. Whatever reactions good or bad that people experience when contacting such Masters, are the result of and due to the response of the numerous powers (Tajalliyat-shaktis) that are alive and active round such personalities. 
The mythological lore of all religions will be able to furnish numerous examples of people inviting reaction on themselves being indiscreet in their attitude towards saints. For instance a Muslim saint, who was very much misun≠derstood in his surroundings, was one day approached by a few rif-rafs from the town, bent upon mischief. These people had a bier (coffin) ready with a living human being made to lie inside and they requested the saint to perform the valedictory pray≠ers (Namaz-e-Janaza) for the dead one before him. The idea was to fool the saint and maltreat him for not being able to find out if the bier contained a living being or a dead body . 
The saint tried his best to evade the situation forced upon him by saying that he was not a priest and someone else qualified for the job be approached. But no excuses prevailed and the saint was forced to conduct the vale≠dictory service. When he had finished prayers the saint non≠chalantly asked the people to remove the bier with the dead body therein immediately to the burial ground. 
When the mischief-mong≠ers opened the coffin they expected their living friend to jump of it, simultaneously exposing the hollowness of the saint's claim to spirituality. But lo, to their horror, no living being jumped out and the man lying in the bier was as cold as a corpse. The people when they took in the situation felt painfully peni≠tent and fell at the saint's feet beseeching forgiveness and mercy for themselves and the dead person. The saint was 

however inexorable and said, "The arrow has left the bow; it cannot be recalledóit was predestined.'' 
As to why saints are very often misunderstood and some of their actions and behaviour in the eyes of the laity appear ridiculous or incomprehensible, the philosoph≠er Plato tries to explain away in a beautiful passage when he says:* 
''And you will understand that those who attain to this beatific vision are unwilling to descend to human affairs; but their souls are ever hastening into the upper world in which they desire to dwell. And is there anything surprising in one who passes from divine contemplations to human things, misbehaving himself in a ridiculous manner...? 
Anyone who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's eye quite as much as of the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees the soul of anyone whose 
* 
vision is perplexed and weak will not be too ready to laugh; and he will first ask whether that soul has come out of the brighter life, and is unable to see because unaccustomed to the dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by excess of light. And then he will count one happy in his condition and state of being. 
The above explanation by the Greek philosopher in some aspects may be true of saints, but it certainly does not bespeak the whole truth about Spiritual Perfection which is the experi≠ence of feeling and being infinite and finite at one and the same time. The more a saint after God-realization tends towards normal consciousness, the more he evinces his spiritual greatness and perfection. 
When once it is conceded and recognised that numerous spirit≠ual powers are functioning around the personality of living Masters óand this fact is recognised in the esoteric teachings of all religionsóthen it remains to be determined as to what should be one's attitude 

towards saints and spiritual per≠sonages. The following attitude sounds perfectly safe and reas≠onable: 
The wordly people would be well advised to follow the tenets and formalities of one's own religion and allow destiny to take its own shape, either in this life or the next. 
They should scrupulously avoid contacting saints out of idle curiosity as there are greater chances of their misunderstanding such spiritual personalities, with a consequent bad reaction. 
When experience, as a result of hard knocks from the world, sobers people down, resulting in a feeling of disgust and renunciation and a longing for something stable and unchangeable, then very often, it is the Master who seeks out such aspirants and satisfies them spiritually according to each one's preparedness for the Path. 
It is only those who are fired with a zeal and longing to solve the riddle of existence, if possible in this very life, even at the cost of sacrificing mentally and physi≠cally everything they hold dear and precious, that should try to contact and seek the grace of a Spirtual Master. It is the living Masters alone that can unlock the gates to the Kingdom of Heaven which is within everyone. 
When Meher Baba was asked, as to what should be the correct and safest attitude of people towards saints, he very knowingly recalled the significant words of the Persian poet, Hafiz: 
'' Ya makun ba peel-banan dosti; Ya bina kun khana-e dar khurde peel.'' 
(Either do not form friendship with an elephant driver; Or be prepared to receive his elephant as well.) 

