
ï 



Notes From My Diary 

F. H. DADACHANJI 

February the 15th of this year, acc≠ording to the Parsi calendar, will be Shri Meher Baba' s forty-fifth birthday. As he is on tour, there will be no public celebration this time. Even the place where he will next be on this occasion is unknown. 

At the time of writing we are at Delhi. Our party visited Benares and Agra after the long halt at Jubbulpore. The move, as stated above, is still a closed chapter. 

Baba's stay in Jubbulpore for 20 days has been full of very interesting inci≠dents. To 



summarise, it was a period of great activity when much important work was done, touching both the public and private aspects of Baba's spiritual activities Baba and his large party were the guests of one of his very dear disci≠ples, Mr. J. D. K., the City Magistrate. The spontaneous gesture of placing his own residence at the disposal of the Master and the special group of his disciples, shifting himself to stay with the other members of the mnandali in a hired cottage close by, and the careful attention he gave to all the details of the special requirements of the party, cannot be too highly spoken of and appreciated. Apart from all these perfect arrangements and attending to his usual official duties at the courts, the services that the Master exacted from him in various other spheres were all rendered in a remarkable spirit of absolute submission and readiness to respond to the Master's will and behests, however severe and trying. Love and devotion of a very rare quality only could stand this test. 

For the first ten days at Jubbulpore, Baba's sojourn was kept private and no interviews were given. But as one of his devotees remarked, "Wherever there is sun, there is bound to be light," the very presence of the august Being aroused the true aspirants and devotees who sensed and felt it. Scores of inquiries and requests were made by the many desiring the master 's dar≠shana. There is a saying in vernacular "Bhakta adhin Bhagwan" meaning Bhagwan (God) is always dependent on his Bhakta (devotee). In other words, the call of love could not be rejected, and whatever the reasons of keeping his visit strictly private, Baba did respond to the call of devotion, and a day was fixed for public darshana. Sunday the 8th of January witnessed long lines of devotees pouring in throughout the day for the benefit of the Master 's darshana and blessings. Private talks were also allowed to many, and their questions touching various problems of life were answered. At the special request of the gentry of the city, a second day, the 10th of January, was again fixed for darshana of ladies who kept purdah or for 



other reasons would not come out in public in the presence of men. On this occasion, Baba 's answers to the ques≠tions asked were read from his alphabet board by a lady interpreter. Even after this, till the day of Baba 's departure from Jubbulpore, crowds of people desirous of darshana kept waiting outside the gates during all hours of the day. Baba occasionally responded by coming out himself in the compound. A few were even permitted to his room for private interviews. 

Of special interest among these pil≠grims was a holy man, "clad in sack cloth and ashes". He has his seat outside of Jubbulpore, is well rec≠ognised and has a following of his own. Baba appeared to him, he narrated, coming towards him on a bridge at Hardwar, a sacred place of piligrimage for the Hindus in the Himalayas, although Baba physically was at the time in Ahmednagar, one thousand miles away. The instant he saw Baba at Jubbulpore, he recognized him to be the Master he saw some time back at Hardwar. Turning to his disciples after this was related by the holy man,  and explaining the significance of such un≠usual appearances at different places simultaneously, Baba stated, "Baba is here with you and at the same time in many places." This fact that is the personal experience of many is well known to his mandali. 

    Baba and the entire party spent the Christmas eve and the day after at the Bhera Ghauts, about 13 miles from Jubbulpore, where the famous Marble Rocks present a sight majestic in beauty. Here, the river Narbada has carved a three mile canyon through mountains of varied coloured marbles. The ancient legend goes that it was the abode of the Monkey-God Hanuman. High above in the hills is one of the Hindu temples dedicated to the God Vishnu, which is also a place of beauty. Baba has chosen to come to this place privately and unknown to anyone, to do his internal work in the quietude of these secluded surroundings. His identity, therefore, was not disclosed. However, some of the visitors to this place, during these holidays, recognized Baba's disciples, and although they were explained that this was a 



private visit and he would see none, they considered this as no chance meeting but a divine benediction on them and appealed for darshana of the Master. As if to respond to their call, Baba arrived just at the time when they were being informed to meet him later in Jubbulpore. In such exceptional cases where Baba feels the depth of the heart's longing to see him, he waives aside all restrictions and allows free access to love to express itself. Meeting the Guru face to face, they at once laid their heads at his sacred feet and had his darshana. 

At the close of the year 1938, Baba spent three days at Mandla, a quiet place about 60 miles from Jubbulpore situated at the junction of two great rivers of India, the Narbada and the Godavari. Baba had long since expres≠sed his predilection for Mandla due to its spiritual atmosphere. It is here, he explained, that in ancient times lived great souls and saintly beings. tapasvis and yogis (ascetics) practising pen≠ances. One of the most inspiring incidences during the short stay at Mandla was the walk to the famous 

Sahasra-dhara (thousand water falls). Here, it is said; the river Narbada has its source. In the solitude of nature here stands the temple of the Perfect Master, Sankaracharya, who lived in these surroundings about two thousand years ago. At the river bank Baba performed the symbolic action of putting his foot into the river, explaining the signifi≠cance of this gesture that wherever the Avatar touches a river with his feet, the waters are purified for all those who come after. 

As usual, none were informed of Baba's stay at Mandla, although the presence of Mr. J. D. K., who acted here as a City Magistrate some two years back, and being a well-known personality created a stir. Mails and telegrams coming in Shri Baba 's name, however, disclose the Master's identity, and in consequence inquiries and requests are made for his darshana which Baba grants just before leaving. 

In one of his pensive moods, Baba one day gave a discourse on general subjects and in particular on the benefits and significance of Guru-Sahavas 



(contact with a Master). He also touched on a very important point, the Elimination of the Ego, which is reproduced hereunder in fragmentary form:

 "Of the three most important things to be eliminated before attaining God-realization are greed, lust and ninda, the last meaning 'back-biting ' is the worst and most disastrous. One can overcome greed, or even lust, though both of these are very hard to get over, but the worst and the most difficult of all to eliminate is this habit of ninda, speaking ill and trying to find faults or flaws of others, because this particular act or vice incurs the burden of sins, or what is technically termed as sanskaras of others, which is spiritually very derogatory and reactionary. "

    Just the night previous to leaving Mandla, Mr. P., one of the leading pleaders of the place and a friend of Mr. J. D. K., came to see the Master and suggested that there were some very beautiful sites on the banks of the Narbada suitable for a spiritual Ashrarma (retreat), if Baba intended to open one on this side. As the Master liked Mandla for its spiritual atmos≠phere and background of the past, he agreed to go and see one out of those suggested. Although there was very little time, he went over it, making his own observations carefully though hur≠riedly, just before leaving Mandla. 

About a week after this, one night, a car arrived at mandali ' s quarters in Jubbulpore, and two Hindu gentlemen from Mandla, Mr. Ch. and Mr. P., are announced, desiring a personal meeting with Baba on some important matter. Despite the late hour of the night, Baba saw them. After paying their respects to the Master, and disclosing the purpose of his special visit, Mr. Ch. offers, with great humility, a gift of a hundred acres of his property at Mandla, with a request to the Master to accept it for the establishment of his Spiritual Centre. This spontaneous offer made with all sincerity and depth of the heart, was lovingly accepted. In this connection, Baba had again to go to Mandla to see the property, situated on the banks of the Narbada, with 2000 mango trees, a very choice site indeed. This particular area on the banks of the river Narbada is said to be the tapobhoomi (the abode of penances) of the ancient rishis. In their times, this particular property had a lac (100,000) mango trees and it was actually named 'Lakh-Ambe' (meaning a lac of mango trees), of which these 2000 have still survived. Baba appeared very happy during the stroll of survey of this site, and at a particular spot he sat for half an hour, surrounded by the leading men of Mandla, many of whom having accidentally come to know of Baba's arrival that day had come there to see him. They had awaited for years, they said, for a saintly Being to visit this particular place where they always felt the spiritual atmosphere. They had also read and heard of Baba, but had not seen him. His coming now to Mandla, they believed, was in response to their prayers and long cherished hopes, and they felt sure that Baba would like the place and establish his Ashram. This group constituted the influential legal practitioners of Mand≠la, almost all spiritually inclined at the same time, which is a rare combination  in these times of hard materialism. And it pleased Baba to be with such a group of cultured people having also a good understanding of spiritual literature and Shastras (scriptures), etc., and desiring spiritual enlightenment. During the two hours that they were in Baba's com≠pany, he gave them an important discourse on Truth, the Path and Spiri≠tuality as it truly is, from what it is understood or rather misunderstood by even the so-called Vedantists and Pun≠dits. Spontaneous cooperation and help in the legal and other arrangements to make the gift deed were readily offered by all concerned. On the request of a certain party of devotees who had lived a secluded life for years and could not go out, Baba paid one of his rare visits to give them the benefit of his dar≠shana that they desired. 



    Two days before leaving Jubbulpore, Baba went to Katni, about 60 miles from Jubbulpore, for a short visit to Mr. and Mrs. B. They are long time devotees of Shri Upasani Maharaj, Baba's second Master, whom the de≠voted family had only recently 



had the honour to receive in their home. It is significant to note that simul≠taneously with Baba 's movements on tour, Shri Upasani. Maharaj has also been touring, visiting Nagpur, Jubbulpore, Katni, Benares, etc. The two Masters thus moving in the same directions simultaneously seem to be indicative of important spiritual working in these regions. 

    Baba and the party 1eft Jubbulpore on the 15th of January for Benares via Katni, where they rested for the night in the same home of Mr. and Mrs. B. of Katni. 

    A representative of the Associated Press in Jubbulpore sought Baba for a message and also wished certain ques≠tions answered. These are reproduced herewith. Question 

    How long will the present chaotic state of affairs continue in the world ? Answer 

    As long as selfishness exists as its root cause. Question 

How long will your Holiness stay in Jubbulpore in particular and India in general? 

Answer 

I leave Jubbulpore on the 15th, con≠tinuing my tour to Benares, Agra, Ajmer, Kashmere and other places, and intend to return to Jubbulpore in April. I intend to open a Spiritual Centre here or at Mandla. Question 

    What is your Holiness ' opinion about Mahatma Gandhi? Answer 

He is a good, noble soul, trying to serve humanity with all heart. Question 

When does your Holiness think India will he liberated ?  Answer 

    When Hindus and Mahomedans cease quarrelling. Question 

Whether the Jews, the most op≠pressed nation in the world at present, will be able to withstand the onslaught that is being perpetrated on them by Hitler and Mussolini? Answer 

Jews or no Jews, whosoever sticks to Truth or is on the side of Truth, can withstand any onslaught. Question 

Will your Holiness kindly give me a Message which I may broadcast to the world? 

