
Meher Baba on different occasions called Harry Kenmore one of His most intimate Mandali, His Apostle, His dear son and a chip off the old block. When Dr. Kenmore was in India with Baba he served both in his capacity as a Doctor treating the God-Man's physical body and in his capacity as a Mandali performing special tasks to help Baba in his universal work. When Dr. Kenmore was in New York, before and after Meher Baba's leaving of the body, he served Baba as completely as when he was with Him in Meherazad with the same intimacy and surrender. 
First of all Baba called Dr. Kenmore's clinic in New York "Baba's clinic," said that all those who came there to be treated were sent there by Baba, and told Dr. Kenmore that it was none other than Meher Baba whom he was treating in his clinic every day. Dr. Kenmore's commitment to his patients was total and he administered therapy to them as intensively and as lovingly as if he were treating his Beloved Master in India. 
Most significantly Dr. Kenmore continuously served those who were in pursuit of the Love, Truth and Beauty of Meher Baba. In doing so he addressed himself to that in an individual which was most alive, most mature and most ready to accept the new dispensation of love and Truth wholeheartedly and without reservation. Dr. Kenmore felt that Meher Baba's message was not so much for humanity as it was for what he termed "youthanity." In fact one day in November 1968 Baba asked Dr. Kenmore how old he was. When Dr. Kenmore told Baba, Baba said he looked to Baba more like he was 25. Now before considering further how Dr. Kenmore fulfilled the task given to him by Baba in serving those pursuers with whom he came into contact, it will help to take a look at the nature of youth which is somewhat paradoxical. On the one hand young people insist upon the actuali­zation of such ideals as love, honesty, freedom and selflessness. On the other hand they often miss the ultimate consequences of upholding such ideals. Dr. Kenmore helped to combine in young people the untamed and unadulterated enthusiasm that comes of learning of the advent of Avatar Meher Baba with the real depth and maturity which are necessary for the possessor of such enthusiasm to be of use to others. 
Many are familiar with Meher Baba's capsule discourse, "Love and Devotion" but probably few know of how it came to be given. Once Baba held a Darshan program and had one of His Mandali describe to Dr. Kenmore exactly what was happening throughout the program. This particular Mandali described how those who came for Baba's darshan placed heavy garlands of flowers around Baba's neck and bounced their babies on Baba's feet. Baba had recently suffered an automobile accident in which he had fractured his hip joint. After the program Dr. Kenmore complained to 
be called devotees but not lovers. Baba was pleased with Dr. Kenmore's observation and it was then that He 
spontaneousl"  gave  the  discourse,  "Love  and  
Devotion":  
Love burns the lover.  .  

Devotion burns the Beloved. 
Love seeks happiness for the Beloved. 
Devotion seeks for blessings from the 

Beloved. Love seeks to shoulder the burden of 
the Beloved. Devotion throws the burden on the 
Beloved. Love gives: Devotion asks. Love is silent and sublime, devoid of out­
ward expression. Devotion expresses itself outwardly. Love does not require the presence of the 
Beloved in order to love. Devotion demands the presence of the 
Beloved to express affection for the 
Beloved.
  It is the ideal that is expressed in this discourse that Dr. Kenmore encouraged in and elicited from those who came into his contact. He blasted any outward display of so-called love for Meher Baba such as an individual's declaration of himself as a Baba lover or young men and women embracing each other in the name of Baba's love. Dr. Kenmore had felt the heat of the fire of Divine Love in Baba's presence and knew that it was not to be taken lightly. 
Thus when a person interested in Meher Baba would enter in a conversation with Dr. Kenmore, Dr. Kenmore would take extensive time and make a total effort to relieve that person's misconceptions about Baba so that there would not be a trace of confusion left and the heart could respond more fully to the residence of Meher Baba within. For example Dr. Kenmore heard people say Baba does this through me and Baba does that through me–Baba drives my car through me and Baba does my school work through me. Dr. Kenmore felt that this type of behavior resulted from a superficial reading of a discourse by Baba which encourages the aspirant to shift his attention away from himself by thinking that the Master lives and acts through him. Dr. Kenmore pointed out to individuals who indulged in this type of verbal exchange that Baba was offering to the aspirant a technique to enable the aspirant to begin to surrender to God. Should the aspirant choose to make use of this technique he must do so silently, on the inside. As soon as one spoke openly about Baba wanting such and such or doing such and such it became a joke, an abnegation of responsibility for one's actions comparable to a little kid blaming his bad behavior on an imaginary friend and an insult to the Divine Beloved within. Dr. Kenmore would make such 

Baba that these were not lovers who added to Baba's points with great force but also with humor. In this way physical pain with their display of affection. They could a person would feel lifted out of himself and 
freed of his confusion. Naturally those who preferred to prolong such superficial banter would take offense at Dr. Kenmore's direct and uncompromising approach. Another example of Dr. Kenmore applying himself to set people straight about Baba stems from misunderstanding of Baba's statement, "You and I are not we but One." Dr. Kenmore sensed that many people were avoiding rigorous discrimination between true values and false beliefs and avoiding making the demands of themselves that Baba made of those close to Him when they casually remarked, "You don't have to worry about it we're really all One." In response to such off-handed and ununderstood parroting of Baba's statement, Dr. Kenmore pointed out that when Baba says, "You (the Real Self asleep within) and I (the God-man, the manifest Christ) are not we but One." it is true. But when an individual who has no consciousness of this Real Self says we are all one, nothing could be further from the truth. The individual experiences himself as an individual and does not experience Oneness. Only one who is God-realized has the authority to make the statement, "You and I are not we but One." Dr. Kenmore would also insist that Baba's books were eternal material for our generation and sufficient unto themselves. One should not go to the past and adulterate Baba with Christianity, Hinduism, Mohammedism, yoga, etc. If you mix old wine in with the new wine you no longer have new wine Dr. Kenmore would say. 
The natural and spontaneous way in which Dr. Kenmore served Baba in others was most especially felt by those who participate actively in the work at the Society for Avatar Meher Baba. The young people who are currently active at the Society for Avatar Meher Baba began to gather when there was work to be done on the book of Family Letters. When Dr. Kenmore went to see Baba in India in 1968, Baba held the book on his lap, flipped through the pages and expressed his happiness with the book and with the quality manner in which it had been produced. It had been the intention of the Society to produce about twenty books–one for every Baba center. Baba told Dr. Kenmore that there should be enough made for everybody. Dr. Kenmore said, "But Baba we would have to make a thousand." Baba nodded. In order to make one thousand books of the same quality as the one Baba held on His lap with available funds it was necessary for volunteers to come in and collate the books by hand, and transport the collated books to the binders with borrowed cars to be bound. Those who came in to work had more and more frequent contact with Dr. Kenmore and began to know something of the intimacy of Dr. Kenmore's connection with Baba. We found ourselves sitting at meals with Dr. Kenmore and listening to stories of Baba for hours on end. The life and sense of immediacy with which Dr. Kenmore told these stories made one forget the passage of time and one would leave with the feeling of having spent the moments that Dr. Kenmore was talking about in the company of Meher Baba. In connection with the production of the Family Letters we learned from Dr. Kenmore that all work undertaken in Meher Baba's name must be done in a manner befitting the One most dear to One's heart. As Dr. Kenmore would put 
it, when you come to the Highest of the High, mediocrity ends there. Whenever we went to Dr. Kenmore for advice, he would never allow anything to go into production if he felt we could still improve upon it. Dr. Kenmore exemplified this attitude in his relationship with Baba. The floor of the Mandali hall at Meherazad is concrete because Dr. Kenmore felt that Baba needed a hard surface to support his posture after the automobile accident. On one trip Dr. Kenmore brought a large expensive chair with him to India for Baba's comfort. Such incidents abound in the love saga of Meher Baba and Harry Kenmore. 
The Society for Avatar Meher Baba originally came into being to conduct and to finance the minimum of two public celebrations a year ordered by Meher Baba–one of His Birthday and one of the Anniversary of His Silence. As more young people began to share in the work at the Society it was they who began initiating the programs for the celebrations. Dr. Kenmore became advisor and final judge of the proceeding not to mention chief speaker and chief singer at the actual programs. Meher Baba specified that Dr. Kenmore should be sole judge of the material for the celebrations. During the rehearsals Dr. Kenmore would often saunter in and have the musical director pick up the pace. He said that he never felt mournful or tearful in Baba's presence. He always felt joy and exuberance. He never cared for songs that were sad, slow and beseeching of the Beloved. He would make suggestions and corrections so that the songs for the celebrations would be fast, happy and expressive solely of the praises of the Beloved. During the preparations for the celebrations it would sometimes happen that individuals would become very taken with their own ideas and begin to put together work and hold rehearsals on their own without allowing their efforts to be coordinated through a more structured and effective medium. In this way an individual's artistic inclinations would be subordinated to the entire group's purpose of publicly celebrating the advent of Avatar Meher Baba. Dr. Kenmore, notwithstanding his sightlessness, sensed that this was going on and corrected it very simply by appointing one person to organize all rehearsals, make all phone calls and see to it that all efforts were one-pointed on Baba. 
Dr. Kenmore would make even greater demands of himself than he made for others when engaged in Baba work. The talks Dr. Kenmore gave at the Society for Avatar Meher Baba and at other centers in the United States were very powerful when they were given but when they were transcribed from tape they lost much of their force. Dr. Kenmore would sit with us for hours and days rewording every sentence so that the articles for "The Way and the Goal" would take on something of the same life that the original talks had. 
In the near future we hope to write a more complete story of Dr. Kenmore's life with Baba both in India and in America. We are very fortunate in that Doctor Kenmore gave to the Society all his tapes pertaining to Meher Baba. Such a story would include details of Dr. Kenmore's visits with Baba in India and details on how Dr. Kenmore worked with us at meetings at the Society for Avatar Meher Baba, on 
correspondence to people with questions about Baba and on speaking tours to Myrtle Beach, Baltimore, Boston, Chicago and Minneapolis. Dr. Kenmore encouraged in those who felt inspired to serve a spontaneous commitment to Baba's work. Thus one should feel enthusiastic and internally motivated to do work for Baba and at the same time take on responsibility in an intensive and ongoing way. Whenever anyone touched the subject of love for Baba with Dr. Kenmore, he would be encouraging and even tell of a very cherished incident with Baba or mention something Baba said to him in an especially intimate moment. He would always warn the individual to be silent as Baba was Silent about his feelings for Baba. Dr. Kenmore on several occasions quoted Baba as having said, "Love is a continuous burning in remembrance of the Beloved."  



