Order	out	of	Chaos
BY  DR.  WILLIAM  DONKIN,  M. B. B. S., (LONDON)

 
IN the heart of the industrial West, in those grey smoke ridden cities, where the working people pass their entire lives in the drab routine of factory life, there is an over- whelming sense of oppression, and a feeling that the natural and spiritual needs of man have been crushed under the heavy heel of in- dustrialism.
For those who reap wealth and success from the occidental World, there is satisfaction and
 
security. But for that vast majorities who are bound by its chains, trapped in its ugly cities, who clock in and out daily in its factories, who are but the unimportant units in a vast machine, civilization is a source of despair, which tramples upon all aspirations almost at the outset of life. The years hold no promise save the likelihood of unemployment, and the vain hope of better times. Little wonder

 
that some turn to extremism in politics.
Happiness cannot be achieved by economics. Civilization means something more than complex material life, good education, good health, and good food. Man must be free and in the West as it is to-day he is not free, but is pursued by his insatiable appetites, and crushed by the weight of his inventions. Even war offers some hope of breaking the cords that bind him. But in the present war, whether one or the other party wins with flying colours, or whether at the end of a protracted and devastating struggle, delegates from all nations put their very heads together to elaborate another Versailles, a lasting peace can never be achieved without the guidance of one who, through his spiritual state, can impart genuine wisdom to the outline of a new world order.
In the West to-day, how many are there who realize that it is a sense of spiritual values which is lacking? When life is lived from a spiritual standpoint the subsidiary needs take their rightful place.
In what way however can such a change of attitude be
 
achieved? Perhaps the present war will breed such despair, that out of it will arise a new feeling of man for man, which will embrace all humanity. The same was hoped of the last world war, with but little result. The world apparently lacks a leader who has authority to point the way, and the influence to encourage mankind to follow it.
We however, who are followers of Baba, feel that in him lies the promise of an authoritative figure who will guide mankind to genuine and lasting happiness. Because of his universal consciousness he lives in all men, and so can appeal to all men. In him there is no barrier between East and West, for he satisfies the highest aspirations of both. To meet him is to discover that in him lies the solution of all personal problem. His humanity for- gives all failings, and the greater the individual despair, the more abun- dantly does his love enfold those in need of it. It is only the self- satisfied who failed to feel his influ- ence, and it is perhaps only when the present crisis has broken the most complacent of egotists, that Baba's message will be given to the
 

 
world. The West is not yet aware of its need, but when that awareness develops, the man of the moment is ready to take his place at the head of humanity.
The West must be spiritually awakened, and only by the touch of the God-man can this be attained: under the wings of his boundless love mankind will learn that their own happiness lies in service to others.
The complicated technique of Western life must continue, and although civilization has been temporarily overwhelmed by the scope of its own inventions, it needs only the intuitive wisdom of a realized soul to lead it to an understanding of genuine values.
The East is perhaps never  destined to surpass the West in the elaborate methods of mechanical life. But the East can and will assert
 
itself as the zenith of human development by being the home of Masters who have realized the infinitude of universal life, and who can show East and West alike the way to live their lives fully and happily. They define for humanity its goal and help them towards its attainment.
World conditions may deteriorate in the coming months or years, but we who arc followers of Baba feel that when the appointed moment arrives, the bewildered cry of the West will be answered by this new and totally unexpected figure, who will galvanize the human race to new efforts at achieving a real and lasting happiness. In Meher Baba lies the hope of the distracted world for the restoration of 'Order out of Chaos'.
 

 