
c 
Spiritual Anecdote 
BY R.B. KALE, L. C. E. 
Once Sadguru Macchindra­nath was on his usual itinerary, accompanied by his chief disciple Gorakhnath. Whenever it was intended to make a halt, they always used to sojourn in some old temple, away from the town and its populace. As was natural, it was always Gorakhnath, the disciple, who was required to beg for alms or food from the neighbouring town or village just sufficient for the bodily sustenance of both. 
At a certain stage of their journey, when they had made themselves comfortable as usual, Sadguru Macchindranath addressed his disciple saying, "Gorakhnath, you have been performing the duty of 
begging for alms very conscien­tiously for such a length of time. Today, however, I feel like going out for begging in the town myself." The disciple dutifully submitted to the wish of Guru Macchindranath who immediately left in quest of food. 
The Master went begging into the town from door to door and offered God-realization, in exchange, to anyone parting with a handful of flour. But to his surprise nobody in the town took any notice of him. He persisted for some time, but everywhere he was rudely shaken off, ridiculed, abused and at some places even man­handled. It was about noon, and smarting under the igno­

minies that were showered on him, the Master returned to the lodgings quite famished and tired. Gorakhnath heard the sorry tale of all the incidents experienced by the Master in the town, and felt baffled as to why nobody was willing to part with even a handful of flour in exchange for such a coveted reward as God-realization. As both were hungry, and food they must have, the disciple begged permission to be allowed to beg as usual. 
Gorakhnath entered the town and stationed himself in a market place, the busiest centre of the town. With his occult powers he made the stick in his hand stand erect in the air a few feet above the ground, and himself sat thereon with eyes closed in a meditative posture after the manner of sadhus. 
The trick was done. The passers-by could not but admire the feat, and in a short time quite a crowd gathered round him to witness the miracle. In token of their admiration for his mira­culous powers, the people began to pour their offerings. Quite a heap of offerings appeared 
there in the shape of assorted grains, coins, fruits and flowers, so much so that the pile reached the top of the stick hanging in the air. 
Sadguru Macchindranath, in the meanwhile, was feeling very hungry, and was wondering as to what had kept Gorakhnath away so long. Sensing something wrong, he also went out in search of the disciple. To his horror he found Gorakhnath in the midst of a motley crowd, seated on the top of the stick with offerings piled around him. The Master got very much enraged at the scene before his eyes, and immediately ordered the disciple to come down. Gorakhnath, no sooner he heard the voice of the Master, opened his eyes, and landing himself on the ground, bowed reverentially at the feet of the Master. 
Sadguru Macchindranath very seriously reprimanded the dis­ciple in the presence of the people around for making such a cheap display of his occult powers which, he said, were not intended to be bartered against a little food-stuff and money. The disciple penitently hung down his head. 


The crowd felt greatly overawed powers. Recognition and sub-at this incident and many mission by people very easily therefrom recognized in the Guru follow miracles, and the prospectthe erstwhile mendicant whom of gaining real knowledge and they had so cruelly insulted and spirituality seldom attracts them.”ill-treated that very morning. It is on this account that Shri Coming to know of the true worth Meher Baba holds in high esteemof the Master, the people begged his present following in the world to be forgiven for their which believes in him as a misbehaviour towards him and Master, without inviting any came forward to offer him outstanding miracles from him. anything that he needed. After his manifestation, Shri 
Gorakhnath very apologetically Meher Baba says, the world explained to the Master, "Such iswould come to him on account of the way of the world. It is very his miracles and not for his Real easily taken in by cheap Self. demonstrations of miraculous 
ã. 
THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BABA
