
SHRI MEHER BABA is Master not alone of the spirit but of every department of human life including psychology—which in its true sense is the understanding of human nature. During the period of half a year his disciples had been in the new location of Bangalore and in every sense the 'the spade work' in the many different phases of the one spiritual activity, had been strenuous. At the commencement of 1940 the Master called his disciples together and stated that this year would become a time of unparalleled suffering and stress the world over, in which he too would share in its sufferings. Hence as there was now an interval during the month of January, it was the right moment to break our routine and take a side trip to some of the sanctuaries of which ancient Mysore is famous. We all knew, too, that when Baba suggests a seeming holiday, it is for the purpose of his Work as well. Experience with the Master in any of his travels has always proved this—some soul is waiting, ready for the divine contact, to be given a push on the spiritual Path or there are 'seeds' to be sown that will eventually flower into spiritual growth in the territory visited. Usually it is both, plus his own unfathomable ways of working in the spiritual planes of consciousness, as yet unper­ceived by ordinary man. 

It was in January therefore that we journeyed forth by large bus and some private cars, like a band of lighthearted adventurers in life, with their Beloved Guide. Cares and worries of mundane existence, the Master never permits to rest but momentarily on our shoulders, I might say that Shri Baba allows his disciples to suffer but not to fret or worry or even be bored. Suffering is one of the means to spiritual awakening and inner per­ception but worries of personal, every-day living only cloud the vision and impede the spiritual 
growth. If it is true of the Avatars, like Christ, that they suffered with humanity, it is also true that they entered into the joys of humanity as no one else could! It has been remarked about Shri Baba by those who have seen him in all parts of the world that he "makes those around him happy''. When one is with the Master, material 'giving-up' or even 'penances' are never privations for bit by bit almost imperceptibly, the things of the world are exchanged for the things of the spirit and, in this great exchange of life for Spiritual Life, comes the bliss and meaning of existence. Therefore is it said that the spiritual Path is easier to tread with a Master. Joyousness is an attribute of God-realized souls and its effulgence radiates to those around. Thorns of life are not eliminated but the fragrance of its flower is predominate. 
On the great plateau of Mysore, the town of Hassan stands midway between Bangalore, one of its principal cities and Mangalore a sea port on the West Coast. We made our stay there of six days at a Dak Bungalow and each day took a side trip to places of 

interest. The first day we visited Sravana Belgola, which is the seat of the Jain community and famous for its colosus—a stone statue standing 58 feet high, greater in height than any of the statues of Ramases in Egypt. Moreover its position is unique, as its towers against the horizon on the summit of a granite hill and this monolith is awe-inspiring as well as a work of art. It is said that the ancient Jains of this community carved this figure out of a solid piece of rock, which presumably was provided by nature at the summit—if not, how then was this solid mass erected, over one thousand years ago, before man has modern machinery? It would seem that in those days of old, devotion carved wonders, for this is not the great Jain statue in Mysore State, but it is said that none other exceeds it in height, beauty of location or spiritual conception. Beneath the grey granite hill where the colosus stands is a pool of blue, as large as a lake, with stone steps carved out of the granite in a square and leading down to the holy water. Many thousands of pilgrims visit this sanctuary that in­
cludes several ancient temples. Steep is the ascent above the pool leading up to the sacred image and all must go bare-footed. 
One could find interest in visiting this sanctuary for religious, archælogical or artistic reasons but when going to such a place with the Master it is a spiritual link between the past, present and future. I do not believe it was a coincidence that this visit was just prior to the time when a sacred ceremony was to be held, which occurs only once in a good many years, traditionally when the planets are in a particular conjunction, at which time not less than a half million seekers of God from every part of the continent, come for the annointing of the statue in memory of the great saint who did penances there. 
We of the West are apt to think or rather to assume without thought, that such statues although most beautiful works of art and valuable in archæological importance, are religiously merely 'idols' and see nothing beyond the surface. It has been said by an Indian of religious status: "Even the most uncultivated and illiterate man does not have the piece of stone or wood in his mind when he prays. Tbe image serves only as an external symbol of the object of worship." But what is spiritually important is that back of these great places of pilgrimages in this land of humanity's forebears, is the life of a saint. The ground was made holy through it being the abode, and often the place of martyrdom, of one who nothing dissauded from the love of God. These souls who sought and Iound God are the landmarks in the spiritual progress of Man and their devotees perpetuated their earthly memories in tbe most lasting way they could find. Religions may differ but the parallelism of saints is irrefutable. Humanity draws together near the summits. 

Shri Baba explained to his disciples on a previous visit to the greatest place of pilgrimage in India, "What there is about Benares or Kashi as it was earlier called, is the atmosphere of great souls". Well might the pilgrims of the World be inspired and enno­bled through their example. Here at Sravana Belgola in the company of the Master of this age, his disciples became intimately aware of 
the life behind the symbolism. How could the devout ancients convey to the succeeding generations that here dwelt a great soul? They reproduced in the hardest granite, which even the wind and weather of ten centuries have not marred, a figure of extreme beauty with proportions that dwarf the ordinary man. They carved with painstaking and inordinate skill a face that is wrapt in contemplation of God and no man, not even an atheist of to-day, could fail to see that this face conveyed a serenity that is not the 
the following particulars about Gommata: 
"He was the son of Purudeva of the first Thirthankara and the brother of Bharata. His other name was Bahubali There was a struggle for empire between the brothers which resulted in Bahubali generously handing over the kingdom to the defeated elder brother and retiring from the world in order to do penance. He became a Kevali and attained spiritual eminence....'* 
That Shri Baba confirmed to us that this was a great soul, meant part of everyday man. Around the nude figure, which is a symbol of having given up all earthly possessions, is carved entwining vines that encircle the arms and legs of the colosus and derive from the tradition that the saint practised severe penance and remained in one position so long, while contemplating the Divine, that the vines grew up and entwined his body. 

What manner of man was this saint? An inscription dated about 1180 in the form of a Kannada poem in praise of Gommata gives  more to us than all the inscriptions possibly could. Yet how dramatic in fact was this simply told life-story of who renouncing all at the hour of victory, became an ascetic! 
On our way from the cars to where the ascent of the holy hill hill began, we noticed the eyes of the Master turn towards a narrow side street. What was it held his gaze along that street of shambled houses? We were more interested in the approaching climb and the anticipation of the summit, but Shri Baba knows and feels all. Only on 
our way back we came to realize that here dwelt a holy life of to­day, a torch-bearer and living link with a thousand years ago of spirituality. Shri Baba sent two of his mandali into the side street and there on an incospicuous veran­dah exposed to sun or rain, sat a nude man (reminescent of the ancient ascetic Jain) who feeling the presence of the Master at a distance looked out so that we chanced to see his face. The Master's met his and the inner contact was made in that moment; to those who are advanced spiritually how little time is 

needed! This  man is recognized in the vicinity as the present guru of the Jains though few there are who have actually seen him. Shri Baba told us that despite this ascestic's peculiar behaviour, he is not a mast but consciously on the spiritual Path. As guru, he directs spiritually many Jains to­day, and this 'contact' with the Master will bear fruit we may yet witness among this ancient sect, which like all the religions of to­day, needs a re-flowering. On the other hand it could be that one spiritually longing soul aspiring to God, drew the Master. 

