Individuality 

By Adi K. Irani 

    Taking into view the entire creation, the whole manifestation of the chang≠ing material coming out of the Infinite, its varied spheres of existences colour≠ed by their difference in makeup, their substance, their constitution, their mo≠tion or inertness, their utility or ap≠parent uselessness and all their relative differences, the wide un-compromising contrast these differenciations present, we would believe that to think for a moment of the birth of the universal change to have precipitated in one individual absolute entity, is false. It is difficult to think wherefore this current of mass-unsteadiness should lead us to a realm of insecureness and uncertainty when it has been the outcome of a stable unshakable state of oneness. To believe that the universal flux of affairs with its evil and relative goodness is a permanent inconsistency wherein lies the aim of our life and the panacea of our happiness, is too gloomy a picture to paint and too unjust  an attitude to  adopt. Every thought and act of us betrays a sense of secureness and sta≠bility beyond words amidst the seeming changes and the vicious vicissitudes of life. To try to believe that all are one, and the outward differences exist only in so far they are seen, is to be happily practical about it. The deeper you go the sooner the differences come closer to each other, lingering for a time in their individuality, visible only to the lenses of intuition and insight. Finally all change, all relativity and all individuality is hushed into one silent Supreme Being. 

    To have lost individuality, however great and powerful the idea of oneness, is to have lost faith in everything; in all greatness and goodness which have blessed the world ever since the first individual came into being. By the first individual we mean he who, having sacrificed the abundance of ecstacy, of righteousness and power squeezed himself down to the limitations of an individual 


for the purpose of manifesting the vastness of experience, of knowledge and of bliss in a way palatable and understandable to other individuals whom, for our exposition, we call the 

Ordinary Individual.

    There are three individualities in the main throughout the cosmos; Ordinary Individual, Divine Individual and The Individual as the most general classification of individuals. The first and very common is an Ordinary Individual who, beside himself, his intellect, his feelings and his habits is not conversant with anything outside of himself or outside of anything that can≠not bend and twist through the narrow windows of his perception and subjective under-standing. Anything he sees is what he sees and is not what it really is. Anything he hears and smells is not the sound or fragrance that objec≠tively exists. The touch of things he senses also suffers from the perversion of a faithful perception. All his senses are the interpreters of the true knowledge of things. Their interpret≠tation is not false from being true, or wrong from being right; they are nar-rowed, limited and partial. The Ordi≠nary Individual labouring under the delusion of a true perceiver is not a charlatan. He is true, he is honest and he is sincere. He sees what comes before him and says what he sees. His faculties of smell and sound and of understanding are exactly how they reveal to him. Should he disclaim them, he disowns them; should he refuse them, he sees nothing higher than them; should he deny them he finds hard to thwart the in. This is the Destiny of our Ordinary Individual or his hereditary principle; this is the harvesting of what he sowed, or the chance that has made him so. This is the stage in his development or a well t bought out plan of nature; this is the curse of a god or a vision in synthesis. He is not a charlatan but he surely is an obstinate. He thinks, does and moves right, but he insists on what he thinks, on what he does and how he moves to be considered the only way how all should behave and all should think. He has his ways and he wants to standardize them. He wants all to be crushed within the precincts of his subjective understanding 





 

and partial perspective. He fails to find out how much unexplored the layers of consciousness are which are yet to be enlightened. This is what he is and how we see him. There is no denying that our tiny perverted visioner, claiming all the glories of the world, is but a mighty speck of an individual only perfect in purity of consciousness and mightily imperfect in its widened application. An Ordinary Individual has fully developed consciousness but he cannot make use of it extensively. He can only let it shine through the appertures of his senses and cannot connect himself with the universal understanding which, by its very universality, can see and understand things irrespective of time and space. 

    One universally conscious we call a Divine Individual. He is not divine in the sense that another is void of divinity; divine and not divine are terms only in relation to each other and die when faced with Reality. In the light of Truth and higher understanding they drown into insignificance such as not to sustain an independent existence of its own. Reality, the only substantial Being ever sustaining and never chang≠ing, is the back-ground of all activities material and spiritual, and is the state which the Divine Individual enjoys. He is free from the miseries of life, from the happiness of the world with its reaction, free from the good and ill effects of his surroundings. He does not desire to be jealous; he does not live to face death; does not think to be confused; does not move to be tired; does not see to be deluded; does not smell to be nauseated; does not touch to be contaminated. His desire is his inex≠clusiveness; his death is his sustained life; his thoughts are his overflowing consciousness; his movements are his abounding presence; his sight is his Self; his smell is his divine fragrance; his touch is his infinite contact. He experiences everything in him-self and everything begins in him. He is God conscious and he is the identity of God on earth. He is an individual still, infinitely more individual than the Ordinary Individual. He is forever in the 'I am God ' state. Individuality here is at its 


paramount state. From the heights of this state, which words fail to describe and actions fall short of expression, the Divine Individual sees every thing in him, yet cannot spare a look into the practical lives of those who are the members of the family of Ordinary Individuals. He is too full with the richness of his experience; too stuffed with the contents of the Infinitude and too en-grossed in the effulgence of the Almighty. If he were to look low upon the affairs of mankind, he could not be self-contained. The most destructive upheavals of modern times bearing mass-suffering and heart-rending sorrows cannot invoke his blessings. He is engaged in the divine state of ecstacy and in its merging, relieved only by a feeling of subjective distinc≠tion running concurrently with the divine experience. 

    The impersonal God is personified by the Divine Individual, but the personification is mute and inarticulate. He can neither think nor help the thinking man. He is all for himself; except by the force of his transcend≠dence he can make  one like himself. People by rendering service to him, which he usually needs being uncons≠cious of his body and the world, is said to be serving God in human form. He, on his own, cannot help or advise a Truth-seeking soul, neither can he contribute to the spiritual uplift of humanity. The work of understanding the Ordinary Individuals and from the base of their respective levels, raising them higher and also contributing to mass-welfare of a spiritual uplift, is entirely left to our third and last Individual we treat next.

    The Individual, as the name signifies, is one of those very rare beings infinitely above the Ordinary Indi≠vidual as well as the Divine Individual who, besides being a Divine Individual, functions as an Ordinary Individual least unaffected by the weakness of the Ordinary Individual during and after the period of such functioning. He has all the attributes of the Divine individual, all the richness and depth of experience, and is endowed with the knowledge of how his achievements should be practically applied. His knowledge is unlimited; he has become one with the Infinite; and his universal activities are the 





 

additional phase which gives him a marked distinction from the Divine Individual. He is conversant with all the spheres of the existence of mind, of body and of emotion and of all the moving bodies in space. He has a grip over collective life as strong as individual. His infinitely deep insight is so overflowing and so adjustable that for a thing to remain unsighted in any domain of consciousness, in the face of a deliberate search, is impossible. He can see through men and things and can place himself objectively, so as to appreciate and feel as adequately for others, as they would for them-selves. He has achieved the art of objective knowledge and feeling through adjustability in consciousness that he has gained alongside the super-consciousness of the Divine Individual. Normal consciousness runs concur≠rently with super-consciousness and can be attached or detached whenever desired. Various other forms of con≠sciousness, of more or less intensity between normal and super-normal, are also an open hook to him. He can poise on any consciousness, and, from here, 

review and know things and incidents of any other consciousness. The falsity of experience arising out of a malad≠justment of consciousness can have no hold on him. He can arrange objects of experience in their due place of im≠portance, but cannot overestimate or underrate their respective values. To him the super-conscious state is the only reality, but, for his universal functioning, he has to make use of the lower consciousness. As a Divine Ind≠ividual he is all power and authority, and as The Individual he is free to choose his own living. What living could he choose but the life of others; what breath could he breathe but the breath of others; what thinking could he do but the thoughts of others; what feelings could he enter but the hearts of others; for verily he is all, and all are in him. The Individual is nature's Creator and Creation in One. 

    In nature does Meher Baba find as much joy as in The Individual Himself; and in the welfare of others finds as much happiness as in His own blissful state. To Him all bodies are His body, all minds are His mind and all hearts are 


His heart. He cannot live without the thoughts of others; He cannot long but in keeping with the wishes of others and cannot act but for the benefit of others. He is what all bodies, all minds, all hearts put together, become. He is cosmically alive and free from all fetters of thought, word and deed. He thinks through anyone He finds fit. He moves through those whom He chooses. He expresses through the pen of whom He wants to speak. He is the organ, and the varied vehicles are His mouthpiece. He has His first-hand ex≠periences of Truth and in the light of this stand His ideas. He is Truth incar≠nate, He chooses His medium for  uni-versal expression. His message and His writings bear His original import. The varieties of His self-chosen spokes-men are the different beads on one string of His knowledge of divine facts and their relation to Truth. 

He is the one source of our inspiration, and an Infinite one. He is the incentive to this organ, our small sized monthly with a big flow of ideas. He does not talk except through an alphabetical parchment, and invariably writes through His disciples. He is the spirit of our book and through-out the varieties of language and style in His articles written by His chosen expos≠itors, runs a consistency of His well chosen words. 