
The East preserves its ancient traditions as living realities and its spiritual memories as  facts that can today happen again. One of the traditional actualities reverenced since remote eras is that of the spiritual  relationship of Guru (Master) and chela (disciple). While we of the West have generally little cognizance of the matter, the precedent of this tradition has been brought to us through the five great religions of universal acceptance, all of which interestingly enough have the Orient as their background. These scriptures respectively give evidence of the closeness of bond between Master and disciple, as well as  their  journeyings together. The great Gurus taught and trained their circle not so much by teaching, as through their own radiant example of perfected living on this earth while journeying along Life's highway and
 

byway. The spiritual path to God has ever a counter reflection in the material world.
To try to relate something of an unusual journey taken in these recent times with a modern Guru through the spiritual centres of India, it can at best be but a limited telling, as his unlimited realms of spiritual working are beyond human  apprehension, and, even on the material plane, no one disciple can possibly take part in all the Master's manifold activities. His journeyings  sow the seeds of spirituality. Time conceals much what a Master does, but reveals in its true light what a Master is, for his very being makes every act, however seemingly commonplace at the moment, an abiding reality beyond time and place.
Particularly for Westerners to visualize something of this spiritual tour, its needs must be pictured against the background of the eternal East, 
though it is but a focal point for the regenerating seeds of spirituality to be planted for coming times, at this period of materialistic harvest. Sadguru Meher Baba's approach to any people or any subject, whether Eastern or Western, is modern. Truth is ever new.
India, the scene of this present spiritual journey, is the  great Aryan Mother,  and  her  children are manifold. In fact I  believe  her to be the primordial ancestor that rocked the cradle when the five races of mankind were in their infancy. No doubt because of this close relationship of  races  in  India, not any one native to  her  soil today  considers  any  difference in races  as  such,  for they are all Indian, though dating back from various  invasions  of  this vast land which has a way of eventually absorbing its conquer-­‐ ors—as mother wins back her children. Although every country has its divisions in some form or other, so India is divided through its religions and sub-­‐divisions of religions.   Each   conqueror brought with him his own religion, and it became trans-­‐ planted into the Indian soil, and, along  with  it,    was    brought    its
 
kindred tradition and culture. Therefore one finds today a tremendous wealth of religions and cultures that, despite the passing of ages, are not dead or found only through excavation, but still are a vital part of everyday life of the people. One feels the infinite possibility in India that what was, still is. The unbroken link with humanity's past is still being forged.
Before Christ walked this earth, spirituality had flowered several times in India through Avataric manifestations that left their inspiration and imprint clearly traceable to this day. Thousands of years of fervent religious striving could not fail among the people to in turn bring fruits, and today there exist some of the greatest spiritual saints, as well as religious rogues. "There is in India the highest and the lowest, "Sadguru Meher Baba has told his disciples.
Part of the reason for this present spiritual journey, the modern Master has stated, is for him to personally encounter saints and evolved souls whom  he already knew, but wants personally to contact at this particular time. He
has further stated that the importance of saints is that they point so many to God. All spiritually minded people cannot but agree that the world today never needed the beneficial influence of saints more than  now. All true saints function together as one, in divinity.
Another part of the reason of this journey, which comes about as an automatic natural result, is for the Master to train his disciples, and prepare them for his greater work to come. Giving description of various events in some detail which occurred on the tour of  h e  spiritual centres of India, it might be useful to here
quote from my diary:
Early in the morning of the  8th of December 1938, we left the ashram at "Meherabad with the Master—twenty-­‐two of us—in a motor bus specially designed for this extensive tour throughout India. None of the disciples know the Master's plans, other than Hyderabad (Nizam's Dominions) being our first place of stay, and that we may be gone for as long  as six months travelling from Central India to points which might    eventually    include   the
 

Himalayas—all according to his spiritual	design.	Details	and schedules are unimportant when we travel with a Master who  is the centre of the universe of our spirit. Whether one goes or whether one stays, Life's wheel to us has the same great hub. We are aware that our journey in reality is inward in Truth, although Baba gives it a symbol of outward expression. The bus is  heavil laden with luggage and some cooking equipment, which the Eastern and Western disciples at the outset consider necessary for travel through the cool of winter and the heat of summer, which in India follow one another in swift succession.
Anticipation holds sway as all crowd into the motor bus and depart exactly at the moment designated beforehand by Baba. Those at the ashram for whom other plans of work are to be carried out wave good-­‐bye to the Master with deep  feeling, although knowing that  his internal guidance is ever with them no matter the distance separating. The first stop for the night is at Sholapur, in a Rest House near the railroad station. Owing to the
heavy luggage load, which was later lightened, motoring is slow and we arrive late. As we were to start early next morning it was thought best by Baba that the bedding-­‐rolls on top of the bus should not be unpacked, so we slept as well as we could, on a few tables, large chairs or on the floor, with only our over-­‐coats to cover us in the coolness of a December night—an indication that the trip was not going to be only a " bed of roses ". Baba, however, in his inimitable way, looks to everyone's feelings, moods, and health, as the great Engineer of Life keeps ever the mechanics of living in order.
Next day we continue into Hyderabad State, and after passing the border, we picnic along the shore of a river. Baba who enlivens every situation makes us feel gay and responsive to nature around us, although the country is merely rocky land, and many were feeling the crampness from a crowded bus. Some differences in scenery from the great plateau draw our attention along the way, and every  now  and then we see groves of toddy palms  with   vessels   hanging  to
 
their cut barks, to catch the sweet juices,  and  occasionally   some very large irrigated rice fields, with water-­‐buffalos drawing the cultivators in their slow though majestic  pace.  Approaching  near to Hyderabad,  the  Mahomedan City dating back to  the  great  Mogul times, it was in the rocks themselves, especially the enormous rounded ones pin-­‐ nacled on the adjacent hill-­‐tops, that one could perceive the antiquity of the surroundings.  Long before the Mogul  period  these stone giants stood sentinel, however.
The Master's party were due to be guests of the ex-­‐Prime Minister of Hyderabad, but owing to triple circumstances, one of which was the occurrence of plague for the first time in the history of the village adjoining his estate, arrangements are hastily made to stay on another of his estates that had been closed for some time. The dwelling being an antique palace originall used for Mahomedan women observing purdah custom, it is thought that this place wil give Baba and his party the privacy he has  requested for the sojourn. While the
Master did want a place with seclusion, particularly for the special group of women disciples, whose spiritual  training  is inward, who are travelling with the party, He also wanted for his spiritual work to be near the centre of the City' humanity. In fact when we see this country estate, beautiful as its gardens  are, we recall Baba's words prior to starting on the journey, that  for his work he wanted to be for the first period of stay in a big city. But the master makes use of all circumstances, unfavourable and favourable, and in the end  the result comes about.  Surprising fruits become a  natural consequence when all actions are done selflessly, as a Master	has	completely transcended the ego and works only for the goo   of the whole.
I proves that only one  night we are to spend in this ancient palace which is devoid of all furnishings, though it is offered that furniture would be brought the next day. This night, however, is made memorable by the eerie feeling one often senses in a dwelling of antiquity, and the lines   of   the   poet   came  to  my
 
mind: "Those  who  dwell  in marble halls  and  ancient  palace old in story."  The  unusually  ga  and mirthful spirit of Baba soon causes all to respond, and  the  place is ringing with life and laughter. Presently the gracious wife of  the  official  deputed  for our reception brought to us caldrons of  hot  food  from  her  own home, and, after meeting the Master,	spontaneously	volun-­‐ teered to continue to supervise cooking arrangements for the entire stay of the  party,  which each day thereafter she  brings  over  personally.
Events with the Master move quickly, and the  next  morning  he is off in the  motor  with  the  official, and by 1 a. m. they had already returned, and Baba announces to us that we are all to move that very afternoon, as the residence of the Nizam' brother, which at present  is  unoccupied and is located not far from the  heart of the city, but with a seclusion of a large garden,  has been put at the Master's disposal for the  sojourn.  Nevertheless  to say there is plenty of room  for  such a large party, some others of which have subsequently arrived by  train.  Also Maho-­‐
med, who has been meanwhile brought over from the ashram for the "God-­‐mad" at Meherabad and is a special type of spiritually-­‐ dazed soul, whom the Master considers an important link with future work along this line which will be continued throughout the trip.
At the commencement of a journey outwards details stand out in one's mind, and, as time goes on, the sum total of conveniences and inconveniences overcome their importance. Just so it is as one travels the spiritual path, the prospect constantly widens and details of material life are absorbed into the greater whole. This we find as  our journey continues.
The stay in Hyderabad might  be termed a  time  of  stirring  by  the Master more than outward working. During this period one also feels, as well as sees, the indications that the Master is preoccupied  with   internal spiritual work. However, for the first time, concrete plans are  drawn up of importance for the Master's future International Spiritual Centre. Daily confer-­‐ ences are held with various interested   officials   of    the  State
 

who are personally interested in spirituality in its broad aspect, and blue-­‐prints for the Centre are designed by one of the disciples, who has recently come from Switzerland where he is noted landscape	architect.	The possibilities of establishing in Hyderabad are discussed, and to this end trips were taken to various sites that might be adaptable for the Master's unique future plans the full spiritual significance of which time will unfold, though even the outer frame-­‐work is now so  interestingly unusual.
One day the Master is on one of these site trips with the official and several others, in search of a location, and at a particular point between two lakes, which is quite wild land, Baba  indicated  that this would be a suitable site for his intended future Centre. On the return to our dwelling, the official tells one of our group that although this place which they chanced to pass that day is wild and rocky, he believes he knows why Baba had a preference for this particular site. Baba had commented that it was "rich in spiritual atmosphere". The officia  re-­‐

 
called a tradition that had been handed down from generation to generation in the locality, though little known except by the few who lived thereabouts. The legend runs somewhat as follows: Two thousand years ago there was a Saint who was a disciple of Christ, and, after the Crucifixion, this Saint journeyed to the East arriving eventually in the particular region seen that day and singled out by Baba. The ancient Saint was the type of spiritual being known as Kutub, and it is said that "once Kutub chooses his seat, he never changes." This region was then a jungle that chanced to be the favourite hunting grounds of the then Ruler, and word was quickly sent out to this stranger to move on. But the Saint refused to leave the seat that he had chosen. The Ruler, hearing this, became enraged and sent out armed guards to forcibly remove him; yet still the Saint refused to move and disarmed the guards with his saintly words and demeanour. They reported the facts to the Ruler and he sent still another armed guard, because no one was allowed on his favourite hunting preserve
 
—be they holy or unholy. When the second time his men returned without being successful  and with the story that they dared not touch this saintly stranger, the Ruler became curious, and the next time he went hunting, he decided to see this man for himself. The legend runs that the Ruler was so impressed that he gave word that he could remain, and eventually the Saint became to him a spiritual guide. I seems that Christ had given to this Saint the holy gift of His own shirt which the Saint brought with him and always wore. After years of holy meditation in this jungle place, it was time for the Saint to leave his body. So he passed the shirt of Christ on to his young disciple, with the implicit instructions that the holy relic should never leave the spot. Shortly after the Saint died, the Ruler also died, and wars ensued in the district. So the young disciple left. But  remembering the words of his Guru he first buried the holy shirt deep in the ground beneath the seat where the Saint had sat for so many years.
While Baba himself did not
refer to the legend, he told his disciples afterwards that the site which he had seen that day was spiritually prepared soil, and ways were stirred to obtain it for the Master's Spiritual Centre by the people of Hyderabad who had become so interested in the great project.
A fact that indicates more clearly that this ancient State is rich in spiritual history, is that there is a street in Hyderabad  City called the "Street of the Saints”. Here the past spiritual lineage lies buried, and it is a constant place of pilgrimage by various religions. The present Nizam is spiritually minded; also many of his predecessors were notedly so, and have always had spiritual advisers to the Throne. Outside of the City are two places of interest, located on high opposite hills, one of which is the great and picturesque palace reserved for the King Emperor when he should visit Hyderabad State, and the other is the rocky abode for visiting saints, pinnacled high against the blue sky.
When making the tour with his  disciples   one   day   to  these
 

parts, the Master ha the bus turn around near the base of the steep steps leading up to the abode for saints. Here, seated humbly at the base was a man looking much like pilgrim lost in contemplation of divinity, who, Baba said, was truly    a    spiritual    soul,	well advanced o the Path. The Master gave this man a glance which seemed to cause a light of rare happiness to pass across the countenance of the seated figure who	visibly	showed	an
expression of recognition.
The Master had, previous to arrival in Hyderabad, told his disciples that there is a true saint living in the ancient city. Out of interest some of these disciples question a few local people who seem well versed in the spiritual history of the place, but they are very reticent about the matter, although one admitte there is a Woman Saint—though impos-­‐  sible to find. Shortly before our departure,  the  Master,  who  knows all saints, sent out one  of  his disciples who  for  years  had  led an ascetic life under Baba's spiritual direction  to  search  out the Saint. Baba  often  uses  disciples to establish  a  contact,  and  they are sent out
without any specific information as to the whereabouts, but inevitably they seem to  walk  right to the place. This Woman Saint, it seems, lives in  the poorest and most crowded  part of the city, in an obscure back court-­‐yard. She is in a state of super-­‐consciousness,	rarely functioning on the gross plane. Although constantly surrounded by crowds of devotees seated quietly around her, she does not give advice or guidance—but India knows well the beneficial influence of spiritual being and does not lay the stres on mere doing, as Westerners are hap to consider as prime importance. Baba himself did not find need to visit this Saint, but sent with the aforementioned disciple two of his Western disciples on a second day. Those around the Saint were averse to foreigners approaching her, but in her peculiar way she beckons the three disciples of Baba's to be seated near her, and strangely enough permits the Westerners  to   photograph  her,
 
which they do with deference. Later, upon seeing the photograph, I was struck by her expression of the eyes like a female John the Baptist. Her stature was rigid, with hair matted, and she wore only a lion cloth. Her face inclined toward heaven, blazed with the fire of spiritual intensity.
Shortly afterwards,  the Master, declaring that he has finished the spiritual work that  he had come to d in Hyderabad, gave the signal that we were all leaving the following day, after only ten days sojourn. The surprise to the disciples and the outsiders who had become so interested in the Master's plans for the Spiritual Centre, was due to the fact that the plans seemed maturing, and materially  speaking it seemed an inopportune time to leave. Yet Masters, as we surely know, have a universal vision which comprises the whole scheme of things and not only the part. Events in time bring this out even to the eyes of ordinary mortals.
