
 
Miraculous Experiences of Baba’s Devotees*
BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF


 
HAZRAT   MEHER   BABA says,
"Miracles, whether performed by Perfect Masters or by yogis, are mere illusions in comparison with the everlasting Truth, and are not more real than the shadows of this world.
Miracles performed by yogis are essentially selfish, as they are invariably based on personal (egoistic) motives; whereas the miracles of Sadqurus or Perfect Masters are absolutely selfless, as they are based on the principle of giving a spiritual push to humanity."
In the light of the above explanation of the Master, the miraculous experiences of his devotees recounted herein, need neither be exaggerated in colour nor belittled in importance. If anything these experiences clearly go to prove the reciprocity mental and spritual that exists between the Master and his devotees. Hazrat Meher Baba has clarified the situation still further by saying,
 
"God has to be known through Love	and	not	through	the intellectual search after miracles. That is the reason why, for those who are closest and dearest to me I do not perform miracles. I would have rather no following than use miracles for convincing others of my Divinity. It is true that while loving me people often do have spiritual experiences which were hitherto unknown to them; and these experiences help them in the further opening of their hearts.” For  the benefit of those who may be waiting to  open  their  hearts  in faith and love towards the Master, an attempt is made to record the miraculous	experiences	of	his devotees in the following :—
Dr. A. G. happened to be with Hazrat Meher Baba and a few others in a train journey  from Poona to Bombay in the year 1921. Although it was monsoon, the day of the journey was as clear as it could possibly be in
the rainy season.
 









After boarding the train at Poona Hazrat Baba casually  remarked, "I do not think we will have  a very happy journey. Our train perhaps will have to return from Neral station before reaching its destination." This remark  of Baba went altogether unnoticed until we actually touched the Neral station about 50  miles  from Bombay.
Looking out of the carriage window an unusual activity was noticeable on the railway plat- form and the train also seemed to be more than necessarily delayed. On	making	enquiries		it		was ascertained that only a few miles ahead		between	the	stations, Badlapur	and	Ambarnath,	the railway track  was  damaged  due to monsoon floods. Not only we were		up		against		some		hours delay	but		to	the		surprise		of everyone the train was ordered to be backed to Poona  and  thence via	Dhond	and		Manmad		to Bombay.
It was when we were actually on our way back to  Poona  that the above casual remark of  Hazrat Meher Baba was brought home to us and in spite of his proposal to continue the journey even from the wrong end, we refused to support the idea and finally we all found ourselves after an eight hours journey just  at the place from where we had started.

 

One of the earlier desciples of Baba, Mr. A. A., had a regular mania for racing. In spite of Baba’s displeasure in the matter he simply could not  wean  himself away from the race- course much to his economic distress. One day Baba told him that he would never make easy money that way and the turf was not meant for him, as he was connected with him. To convince him on the point Baba asked him just for once to try all his racing knowledge and skill to pick out the winners in one card and he promised him a little amount to back his certainties of the  day.  He told him point blank that if in spite of his best working in the matter if the horses refused to  turn up he was required to give   up horse-racing for ever.
Mr. A. A. accepted Baba's challenge and worked hard to secure as many winners as possible to vindicate his reputa- tion as an expert punter. True to Baba's words all the horses, the probable winners that he had backed, were no where in the picture and he had to admit  defeat.

Dr. A. G. one day talked to Meher Baba about the idea of importing some drugs from America with a view to ex- panding his business in Bombay. Baba liked the idea very
 

 
much and evincing great interest in the proposition he asked him to allow the order for medicines to pass through his hands, as he wanted to address the envelope in his own handwriting. Just because the cover was addressed by Baba Dr. A. G. began pester- ing him over the question that the goods from America were unduly delayed and there was no intimation from any party as to when the goods would arrive in spite of a delay of more than six months. When Dr. A. G. one day drew Baba’s attention to this situation in a more than unusually  pointed  manner, Baba remarked that the goods would arrive on the very day he sets his foot in Bombay which  he intended doing in the near future.
After a few days, Baba planned to go to Bombay and Dr.
A. G. also accompanied him. When the latter went to his dispensary he was surprised to find a letter of intimation from the Bank agents to clear the goods which had arrived that day. On learning of this Baba simply smiled without owning that he had anything to do with the matter.

Mr. A. H. J. found himself involved in litigation against his elder brother who was a great figure in Government and busi- ness circles. Hazrat Baba was
 
staying in a Jhopri (hut) off Ferguson College road, Poona,. at the time (1922). A. H. J. happened to approach Baba. and explained to him his plight. He explained that he had a legal claim in the assets of his deceased father but it was a very difficult task for him to come out successful through different stages of legal proceedings against his influential and well- established brother.
Hearing the story, Baba promised him success and inci- dentally remarked that he would get only Rs. 30,000 from out of his father's property and this amount he would not receive from his brother.
This		interesting		litigation passed	through		the		different lower courts ultimately reaching the High Court in the course of almost ten years. Mr. A. H. J. succeeded in the High Court and just got Rs. 30,000 as his share and	surprisingly		enough	the settlement was arrived at  with the heirs of the brother who had died prior to the end of this long- drawn	litigation.	Thus	Baba's prophecy of a successful termin- ation of his troubles came out true in all details and Mr. A. H. J. celebrated this happy result by giving	a	huge	and	expensive ovation to Hazrat Baba on the occasion of his (Baba's) birth- day at Nasik in the year 1931.

 

 
While staying at the Jhopri (hut) near	Ferguson	College,	Poona, Hazrat Baba was  approached  by an exiled Nawab from Poona. The latter explained to Baba as to how he was the rightful claimant to a gadi (seat) in a nearby state and how a usurper had succeeded in ousting him. He requested Baba's spiritual intercession on his behalf to remedy lihe wrong done to him.
Baba	promised	him	a	satis- factory adjustment of his affairs provided he accepted a proposi- tion which Baba laid before him  on behalf of a devotee of his. The Nawab promised to do the needful but found it difficult to believe how the situation could be righted, as the living occupant of the gadi was backed by the Government. Baba asked him to wait and see.  In a few days the Nawab was surprised to hear the astounding news of the sudden death of the young occupant of the gadi and he very anxiously conveyed the news to	Baba.	Further	developments ceased as the Nawab backed out  of the promise given to Baba in a moment of despair.

In the year 1923 Hazrat Baba and his party left Bombay on foot via Bombay-Agra road to Sakori in Ahmednagar District, a  distance of about 250 miles. While approaching
 
Bhiwandi, a place about 50 miles from Bombay, Baba and party were received by a Mohomedan engineer Mr. N. A. The  latter  gave a very interesting account of how he was there to receive them and the arrangements which he  had	got	ready	for	the	party's refreshments	in	the	local	dak bungalow. Mr. N. A. related to Baba his overnight dream as to how he saw a party of men headed by a saintly personality trudging along on foot  towards  Bhiwandi on the Bombay-Agra road. The leader of the party had a dazzling hallow of silvery light round his figure and the other members of the party were in kafni (long apron) giving a gold hue to their bodies. Expecting to meet the party of his dream he was there to  see  them and the most pleasing surprise of   it all was that the party turned out to be that of Hazrat Meher Baba and his disciples.

Once while at Nasik, Hazrat Meher Baba ordered a member of the mandali Mr. A. to go in his car to the railway station and having finished the work he was enjoined to return to the bungalow direct. Mr. A. having finished the work much quicker than the time limit given to him, went out of his way to see a party hoping to reach the bungalow in time.
 

 
As	it	happened	Mr.	A.	acci- dentally	overran	a	small		girl playing in the streets and un- happily the accident proved fatal. When Baba was informed of the accident, he rebuked Mr. A. for going out of the way against his	explicit	orders		and		the accident, he said, was  nothing but the result of taking his words very lightly. This incident was a great lesson for the devotees to follow  Hazrat   Baba's  orders   to
the letter.

Once Baba and his party were travelling in a motor bus from Bombay to Poona and Mr. R. K. was driving the bus that day. When the bus was  negotiating  the tortuous and steep climb  in the Western Ghats near Khandala, Mr. R. K. all of a sudden discovered that the brakes were not functioning. The bus began to roll back slowly and Mr. R. K. was nonplussed as to how to control the bus which was slowly but surely heading towards  a deep ravine. The  mandali taking in the situation got panic-stricken and one after another began jumping out of the bus for safety. Mr. R. K.’s actions were paralysed for the time-being and he couldn't even think of saving himself. During all this panicky situation Baba kept seated in the bus  and  refused   to  move  even
 
when a member of the party tried to help him out bodily.
Everybody thought the worst was going to happen as the bus was dangerously approaching the brink of the ravine. Just at this crucial moment Baba was seen to lean heavily on one side of  the bus and instantly to the surprise and relief of everyone, the bus came to a standstill only a few inches away from the yawning chasm beneath.

In the year 1922 Baba and party were at Ajmer. While there Baba asked the mandali to visit Pushkarraj, an important place of pilgrimage with the Hindus, situated ten miles to the north- west of Ajmer. As Baba was suffering from dysentery at the time, the party did not like the idea of leaving him alone. Meher Baba studying the hesitance on  the part of the mandali remarked, ''If I am let alone I shall recover completely by to-day evening. Since you want me to accompany you I do not like to disappoint you. But mark my words, the present illness of mine will be prolonged by 15 days." Baba accompanied the party to Push- karraj and his words came out strikingly true. He recovered in Bombay exactly after 15 days from the date.

 

 
Messrs. R. and A. G. found themselves in partnership in a rice-mill business in the  year 1925 and Hazrat Baba  had blessed the enterprise by actually selecting the site for building at Talegon, Poona District. Every- thing went well and the partnership almost recovered their initial outlay in business in one year. Feeling extra-circumspect the partners approached Baba for advice and brought to notice the possible danger of inviting competition as the business was very lucrative. Baba advised the wiseacres to open another mill in the same locality which would most likely keep away a new competitor.
Although agreeing to the above suggestion and the safety  involved therein, the partners' line of activity was a little bit side- tracked by the news of a new and colossal constructional project in the Western Ghats near Khandala on the G.I.P. Railway. This change of plan was divulged to Baba who heartily supported it. As a result the Khandala mill business came into existence and it proved a very costly experience to the partners that Baba’s original instructions and plans should, under no circumstances, be modified or changed. On being reminded of the fact, as to why he supported the new idea, Baba asked   Dr.  A. G.   to   recite  the
 
couplet of Hafiz:
"The teaching by enlightened ones is only a hint, be sure
Having given the hint, I forget; I repeat it no more."

A similar instance in the matter of not adhering to Hazrat Baba's original advice and pestering him into acquiescence in the object uppermost in one's heart, happened in the case of a Baba's devotee, Mr. Chhagan. The latter was explicitly ordered by Baba not to go in for motor driving, but by unceasingly importunating  him, he was allowed to drive. One day Mr. Chhagan was driving a bus and losing control of his bearings, knocked off about half a dozen coolies working on the road. This incident reminded him of Baba's original advice and he gave up driving for ever.

Mr. R. K. was one day driving a bus full of passengers towards Ahmednagar. They were mon- soon days and the river that they had to cross was in the opinion of Mr. R. K. fordable. So he decided to negotiate it by driving through knee-deep waters. When he was  in the middle of the stream he found the current was much more strong than he had anticipated and to his dismay he even discovered the water level rising.
 

 
The bus came to a stand-still and suspecting some trouble with the engine, he got down in water to tinker with it. Mr. R. K. however lost his foot-hold in water and had it not been for a firm grip on the side of the bus to which he tenaciously hung on, he would have been carried off by the ever-increasing current of the river.
In the meanwhile, simultane- ously with the dangerous plight of Mr. R. K. and his bus full of passengers stuck in the river, Baba was creating a good deal of a fuss at Meherabad. He began instituting inquiries as to where Mr. R. K. was. On being informed that he was out driving a passenger bus he showed displeasure at his doing things which he was not expected to do. Baba was observed to look at the skies heavily laden with mon- soon clouds and said, ''It has been raining heavily; it is  likely
R. K. will be drowned."
With the help of a few vill- agers the bus and Mr. R. K. were landed safely on the other side of the bank and when com-paring the time of the mishap to Mr.  R.
K. and his bus to Baba's sudden anxiety for him at Meherabad, it was found that the two moments exactly synchronised.

Once while Hazrat Baba had his seat inside the wooden cabin
 
underneath the margosa tree by the roadside at Meherabad, quite a good number of agriculturists from the surrounding famine- stricken area approached Baba and requested him to pray for rains. Baba pointed to his dhuni (a hole in the ground for burning fuel and incense) in front of him a few yards away and told the villagers to ignite it again as it was burnt out and cold due to want of fuel. The villagers gathered some twigs of trees and leaves and ignited the dhuni as instructed. No sooner it was fairly lit, clouds began to gather and very soon afterwards the whole countryside was drenched with torrential rains for days together. Fearing that Baba's intercession for rains had gone to the other extreme, to the point of washing away and damaging the crops already in the fields, the villagers requested him that they had had enough of rains, which should now cease. In due course the rain subsided to the relief of everyone concerned.

Dr. A. G. as a result of domes- tic worries and financial difficul- ties, one day felt very much distressed so much so that he almost decided to put an end to his own existence. That night having a very exciting time with his friends in hotel till late in the night,
 

 
he instead of returning home, went to one of the Tata lakes nearby. He walked on the water dam at about 2 a.m. and recalled the whole hier-archy of saints in a very uncharitable frame of mind including Baba prior to taking the final step.
In this frame of mind the cool breeze of the night sent him to sleep from which he awoke at six in the morning. That very day Dr.
A. G. had the surprise of his life  in seeing Meher Baba at Lonavala evidently come to fetch him. Meher Baba told Dr. A. G. that he knew his plight and heard his yester night's call in response to which he was there that day.

Hazrat Baba and his mandali (a few of them) were at Rahuri in the year 1937. The Marwadi who was the proprietor of the  premises occupied by Baba and mandali, was, as per Baba's instructions, informed as to the sorry state of some of his bullocks working on the well.  The Marwadi came there and promised to remedy the state of affairs by utilizing on the job a fresh pair of bullocks.
This promise, however, was never seriously meant to be kept by the Marwadi and when reminded of it, kept on pro- crastinating the same on some excuse or the other. After two months Baba again saw the same pair of bullocks working,
 
with pus and blood trickling  down the fore-legs and the rope round their necks had almost eaten its way into the flesh. Thereupon Baba once again sent for the Marwadi who refused to come saying, ''I simply cannot spend two hundred rupees just to satisfy your humanitarian instinct. I shall do the needful at my own convenience." Baba had to approach the unscrupulous Marwadi in a different way altogether. He offered to purchase his lands for a fat sum and finding him not amenable even to this proposition, he threatened  to leave his premises within  a  week.
This threat was ignored by the Marwadi who never  imagined that any sane man could possibly forego his claim for occupation only after six months, having as a matter of fact, paid for three years in advance. The unfortunate Marwadi never could properly understand Baba who, true to his words, ordered the removal of the Rahuri camp within a week. The whole town regretted very much Baba's departure from Rahuri and even the officials of the place offered to bring pressure on the Marwadi to accede to Hazrat Baba's reasonable but firm demand. Baba advised them not  to interfere and give the unfortunate man undue impor- tance.
Only a week afterwards news reached Meherabad that the
 

 
Marwadi while fording the Rahuri river on horse back, was carried off by the floods and drowned. This tragedy was the talk of the town for some days and almost everyone connected this  incident to Baba's displeasure in the matter.

The following experience of a devotee, Mr. M. R. D. from Rahuri, Ahmednagar District, in his own words will speak for itself:-
“Dear Baba, once more I experienced that there is an unknown hand that's guiding through my difficulties. And certainly the hand is none else's but yours. On the evening of the 14th of July 1939 at about 6 O'clock we nearly ten of us had been to take a walk by the side of the flooded river . . . . All of a sudden I caught a fancy for swimming . . . . I was alone in the flood. I started quite a nice swimming in the beginning but after some ten minutes found myself in the strongest currents I ever met. I fought with it with all
 
my strength bravely for fifteen minutes		more.	Then	I		began losing confidence and I helplessly left myself to the current. I knew I was facing death and all of a sudden I remembered you. . . . A few moments more and I was lost. Just then to my surprise all of a sudden I was as if pushed by  some unknown force under water and I found myself thrown aside by	the	current	in	some		calm waters on the bank. My friends when	they	found	that	I	was carried away by the floods, raised a hue and cry, and some fisher- men had already jumped in the floods for my rescue, but before they reached me, I found myself standing		in	water		just		neck- deep. . . . Dear Baba, I am quite sure it was your hand that pushed me out of the flood on safe land because I remembered you. . . . That was the same spot where the Marwadi		owner		of		our		Rahuri Ashram was lost in the flood, in the		twinkling		of			an			eye. Accidentally it was the same date and time, 14th July evening and  on the same spot.”
 

(To be continued)