The original aspect of love prior to its manifestation in the created world reposed infinitely in the bosom of oneness. It was love in condensation of its quality lying vast and unexpressed in an identity with the Absolute. This identity was unknown to itself. It was not an ignorance of love that prevailed but the highest form of love that knew nothing of knowing or desire except the one revelation of its own true nature. Revelation necessitated a change that could bring forth a differentiated exis­tence. It lay the seed of a manifestation we call the universe where love plays the dual role of attraction and repulsion, male and female, and all the opposites. 
Love in an infinite state was infinitely condensed and had very little to choose except the most finite point to express itself in the shape of creation. Most finite as opposed to the Infinite could be the on1y descriptive measure we have to represent the creative channel of love. While passing through this infinitesimal point, love was 
IRANI 
conditioned into a flowy liquid state which, on manifestation in the gross world, took the grossest form of stone surrounded by its limits and inertness. The infinite condensation evolved into finite condensation of a stone. Infinite Love in trying to express itse1f remained genuinely unexpressed. The period of Infinite Love is the infinitude and the period of un­expressed love is the period of evolution. 
Throughout the progressive stages of the evolution, from the stone form to the animal world upto human and all the human forms, love exhibited its perverse expression in the form of gravi­tation and attachment. The fact that love throughout the evolutionary period did carry with it an element of repulsion proves that the true and all embracing love remained genuinely unexpressed. The begin­ning of unexpressed love is the stone-form, and the culmination of unexpressed love is the human being. The 

LOVE 29 

point of genuine expression of love is the opening of the inner sight of man. 
The quality of love is not strange. It is common to all human beings who consciously or unconsciously experience its stupendous influence through various modes of its expression in life. One falls a pray to love by letting this life-current out through easy channels of delusive happiness and short-lived satisfaction; another tries to poise it on a point of equity and considera­tion and remains pleasingly balanced on the "give and take" policy of the world; a third stakes his faculties and possessions in a frantic effort to attract speedily for himself all the happiness of the world; but the fourth one and the wisest does everything. He revels in the time-worn habits of man to experience their futility through weariness; he faces life in a spirit of bargain to meet the level of practical consciousness; and he stakes, if he has to, all the mental and physical possessions on the dice of spiritual warfare. He does all and everything with a vehement impulse of love armed with a precautionary curb on every fouling . 

. 
effect a wild passion may arouse. He maintains his high water-mark of purity of love and strength of character. Every pure thought of love finds in him a vehicle of un­restricted expression. It blesses him who gives and them who take, because it is pure. The giver knows the nature of love; its developments and consistency from the beginning of creation to a perfected Divine Love where there is a complete understanding of love. 
There are seven stages of development of Divine Love. Its gradual unfoldment determines the progressive understanding of love as to its true nature. The integrating process of love starts from the first stage and ends with the sixth. Alongside the process of integra­tion runs a progressive enlighten­ment of its true nature. In the seventh, the final stage of divine Love, the lover merges into the Beloved, and the two become one. 
The highest result of love is unity, whereas unity is an integra­tion of love. Infinite Love and infinite understanding abounds. The purpose of love from the beginning of the most finite point upto the culmination of divine Love is fulfilled. 
