
WHAT an ignorant question to ask, when people inquire as to what is Meher Baba’s Mission in life? One is at once taken aback by such a question. Invariably it happens that instead of answering the question straight—and in fact it needs no answer—the questioner himself becomes a very interesting subject to study. 
In mentally sizing up the subject opposite, one intriguingly begins to wonder within himself as to what type of a creature is present there to be dealt with. And within a second which seems an eternity, many thoughts and doubts arise and automatically subside, such as:— 
(a) 
Is the man sincere? If he be sincere, then he would perhaps never come out with such a question. 

(b) 
Does the man know any­thing about saints and saintliness? If it be so, he ought to be familiar with the raison d'etre of saints, which consists of nothing but the spiritual regeneration of mankind, individual or collective, in propor­tion to the Divine authority they are invested with. 

(c) 
Does the man believe in saints and the possibility of realizing that state or stage which is the potentiality of
every atom in the universe? The Sufis assuredly do believe in such a possibility as stated by the Sufi Poet Hafiz: 
"If only the Holy Ghost were to 
help once again, Others also can be what Jesus did 
attain.'' 
Swami Vivekananda also has knowingly proclaimed that, ''Even a worm will one day realize God." If the man believes in this spiritual possihility for man, then would he not be humble; and would he not rather indulge in self-examination, instead of holding up saints for vulgar scrutiny? 
(d) Has the man contactcd any living saint in his life-time? If so, what has been his modus operandi with them? For once perhaps this man forgot to question the saint concerned as to his mission in life. Or perhaps the saint in question read the uppermost thought in his mind or referred to some outstanding incident of this man's past life or prophesied a future eventuality. And what has been the outcome of such a contact? Beyond giving a little self-satisfaction for being specially favoured, how does this little attention on the part 
of the saint, help the man concerned spiritually. 
Has this man advanced spir­itually after this contact with the saint? No, he has duped himself. The saint found him too easy to please and consequently disposed him off very cheaply. And surely no father ever gives his child a guinea, if the latter be satisfied with a copper. The man goes out into the world none the better for his experience. He has evidently forgotten nothing and learned nothing. He continues to identify saintliness with miracle-monger­ing of a very cheap type. 
What an ignoramus this man proves himself to be! His case is like than of a man approaching a personage reputed to be wealthy and inquiring of him if was really affluent and rich. In reply the wealthy personage gingles coins in his pockets. This rich gesture immediately satisfies the vulgar curiosity of the man and in the excitement of the moment, very often than not, this man forgets to qpestion if he can have a little access to the riches displayed. 
Here one may perhaps be inclined to defend the man by 

saying that he, at least, is assured of the greatness of the saint concerned and he may probably induce the latter’s grace in future. Well, such a situation is a very remote possibility and surely it doesn't crop up daily. 
But there have been people of a higher calibre like Ghausali Shah Qalander who did not feel satisfied even when a Hindu fakir of Babri vouchsafed to him by means of his spiritual powers, the darshana of Bhagwan Shri Krishna for which he was held to be in great repute at the time. Ghausali Shah after this experience remarked, this vision of Krishnaji given me by you, is not what I came here for. In so far as this vision stood before my eyes, I have projected it out of my mind— in fact I may be said to be its creator. If you know anything of true spirituality (faqiri) teach it to me, otherwise I bid good-bye.” 
Swami Vivekananda, during his college days, used to go pesterting sadhus and faqirs and asking them the question whether they had seen God. Ultimately he caught a ‘Tartar’ in Shri Rama­krishna, who demolished the edifice of his preconceived notions and made him realize God. 
These people never wanted to be wise about their Saints mission but went straight for what they professed and were out to give. 
(e) Is the man capable of describing or understanding what has been the mission in life of prophets, Avatars and saints of the past? If he knows this, then there can be no difficulty for him to understand Meher Baba or any living saint. 
It is wrong to believe that prophets, or Masters or Avatars have come to give religions to the world. Meher Baba says, "The so-called religions are an effort to commemorate the association with a great spiritual Master and to preserve his atmosphere and influence; It is like an archæo­logical department trying to preserve things which only resuscitate the past." 
One must understand that the primary and real object of prophets and saints is to supply a spiritual spark to perfection in proportion to the preparedness of those ready to receive it and as said before, the scope and range of their power and activity in this connection 
depends on the Divine authority they are invested with. This spiritual touch by the Masters of all times is for the select and eligible few; as for the rest of man­kind, they leave behind a bookful of instructions, guidance and hints for the stragglers on the Path. 
(f) Has the man ever cared to inquire as to what is his own mission in life? Does he think that mere eating, drinking and beget­ting is the all and end of existence? The Sufi poet Akber Allahabadi was evidently confronted with this question when he said: 
"How briefly can be summed up the life of my friends, They graduated, they served, were pentioned off—it ends." 
Now how many are there, who approach Meher Baba as sincere aspirants of spirituality with the avowed purpose of realizing one's Self? When Meher Baba declares that he has become one with God—Truth, does the question needs any explanation as to what is his mission in life? And in what better form can a realized personality give out his mission in life, as when Meher Baba says, “I have come not to teach but to awaken”. What a world of meaning and spiritual possibilities, lie behind these words for sincere seekers of Truth! 
“Prudens questio dimidium scientie”—to know what to ask is already to know half. 

