

 

Anna	Kingsford	and	Symbolism	in the	West*
[Adapted  by  Will  Backett (London)]

 
ANNA   KINGSFORD'S  reform
work coincided with the early activities of the Theosophical Society, and other organizations, through which the West received the impetus that culminated at the end of the Nineteenth Century in the message of the Vedanta through Vivekananda, the great disciple of Shri Ramakrishna, and thus made a living link with East and West.
Foremost in combating the materialistic trend of the age, she was fearless in the face of opposition, which she felt keenly on account of her sensitive nature, but her remarkable gifts and personality, self-sacrifice and energy brought loyal support from
 
a wide circle of friends, and com- manded public attention.
Although the Christian Church admits the gifts of prophecy and vision, it has rarely had such a remarkable witness to them in modern times as Anna Kingsford through whom we received the Hymns to the Gods, published in "Clothed with the Sun" after her death, by Edward Maitland, her collaborator at the time of her active work. Her gifts as a poet, the wide range of symbolism and deep mystical appeal, the rhythm of the ancient Greek, and remarkable sequence of thought and aspiration uniting the inner truths of the East with those of the
 

Christian Church and ancient mythology, form a synthesis through which the  spiritual  is seen to be real, and the outer world is clothed with a grandeur, simplicity and significance that lift the soul to God.
Although she was  familiar  with the widsom of the ancients from childhood, having access to her father's library at a time when she invested her dolls with the personalities of the heroes  and  the gods, and staged in the  nursery the scenes through which they move across the stage of the world drama. It was the intuitive faculty which enabled her to link the "outer" with the "inner"  rather than an intellectual comprehension of recorded facts and ideas. The aspect of Venus Aphrodite which she depicts has sometimes been challenged, as it is not the popular conception, but it is one that Pausanian describes as known to the ancient Greeks,  in the time of Cadmus (B.C. 1500) in his account of Greece, written probably before 200 A.D. "There were two statues to the Goddess, one to the Venus Celestial, and other to Venus Apostrophia, who signify respec- tively'':—
“Pure Love'', and ''That which is liberated from the desire of the body." And "The goddess who turns the race of men from unlawful desire.''
The all-embracing character of
 

Love as an essential in every other gift including prophecy and dreams, is expressed by St. Paul the writer of the First Epistle to Corinthians: "Love never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail: whether there be tongues, they shall  cease:  whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know  in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away."
LOVE
The  Hymn  to Aphrodite
"I am the Dawn, daugher of heaven and of the deep:  the  sea mist covers  my  beauty with a veil of tremulous light.
I am Aphrodite, the sister of Phoebus, opener of heaven's gates, the beginning of Wis- dom, the herald of the perfect day.
Long had darkness covered the deep: the soul of all things slumbered: the valleys were filled with shadows: only the mountains and stars held commune together.
There was no light on the ways  of the earth: the rolling world moved outward on her axis; gloom and mystery shrowded the faces of the gods.
Then from out the deep I arose, dispeller of night: the firma- ment of heaven kindled with joy beholding me.
 

 
The secrets of the waters were revealed: the eye of Zeus looked down into the heart thereof.
Ruddy as wine were the depths, the raiment of earth was transfigured; as one arising from the dead, she arose, full of favour and grace.
Of God and the soul is love born: in the silence of twilight, in the mystery of sleep.
In the fourth dimension of space; in the womb of the heavenly principle, in the heart of the man of God there is love enshrined.
Yea, I am before all things: desire is born of me: I impel the springs of Life inward unto God: by me the earth and heavens are drawn together.
I be beneath the waters of the sea in the deeps of the soul.
I am the crown of manifold births and deaths: I am the interpreter of mysteries and enlightener of Souls.
In the elements of the body is love imprisoned, lying asleep in the caves of Iacchos: in the cribs of the oxen of Demeter.
But when the day-star of the soul ariseth over the earth, then is the epiphany of Love.
O Love thou art the latent heat of the earth, the joy of the orchard and the cornfield, the strength of the wine:  thou  art the spirit
 
of song and laughter and of the desire of life.
By thee, O Goddess, pure eyed and golden, the sun and the moon are revealed: Love is the counsellor of heaven.
Cloud and Vapour melt before thee, thou unveilest to earth the rulers of the immeasureable skies.
Thou makest all things luminous, thou discoverest all deeps:
From the womb of the sea to the heights of heaven; from the shadowy abyss to the throne of the Lord.
Thy beloved is as a ring dove, wearing the ensign of the spirit and knowing the secrets thereof.
Fly fly O dove, the time of spring cometh; in the far east the dawn appeareth, she hath a message for thee to bear from earth to heaven."

The Perfect One transcends all symbols, for He is the Reality to whom they bear witness. Shri Meher Baba describes Him thus: "He is the Sun of the spiritual world, and each of His innumerable rays penetrates the innermost heart of each individual existence, gross,  subtle  and mental: thus His infinite existence is linked with each and everything. He has now become the very source of bliss, power and knowledge, which He
 

 
eternally experiences, and which (during the retention of His mental, subtle and gross bodies) uses for the upliftment of humanity at large, and the spiritual advancement of indi- vidual souls.''
The title "Clothed with  the Sun" symbolizes the human soul, illumined by the spirit. There are degrees in mystical attainment, as there are stages in the journey of the soul for the barriers in nature of thought, dogma and ritual dis- appear before the growing 1ight. It was the experience of Said Abdul Arabi to transcend those obstacles through Love: ''My  heart has become capable of  every thought: it is a pasture for gazelles, and a convent for Christian monks and a temple for idols. I follow the religion of Love. Whatever way Love's camels take, that is my religion and my faith.''
The Hymn to Aphrodite was received by Anna Kingsford in 1884, after a discussion with Edward Maitland, who was working out the correspondences between the ''Seven Spirits of God" enumerated by Isaiah, the seven great Gods of the Greeks, the planets, and the character of the seven creative days in the first chapter of Genesis. His out1ook was more scientific than hers, on general  matters,  and  he  was  of
 
great assistance to her in her scientific studies in Paris and she through her intuition, would present explanations to him which he was unable to obtain unaided. Thus they supplemented each other's work, and he was further her companion abroad, when her husband was detained by his parochial duties in England. The latter fully appreciated his wife's gifts, and welcomed Mr. Maitland's cooperation with  her in those aspects where he himself was not equipped.
They had met through corres- pondence, which she started on seeing a letter from Mr. Maitland in a magazine to which she was contributing. A visit to the vicarage followed, and in the fortnight that ensued, all three recognized the innate under- standing existing. Mr. Maitland’s studies led him to the writings of the old Hermetists, which awak- ened his interest in occultism, as he discovered that certain exper- iences he had had were known to them. He deplored the lack of authentic records of the World Saviours and Revelators, whose lives he yearned to know. Through the Homeric Scriptures, he saw mirrored the sacred mysteries of antiquity, corres- ponding to alchemy or  the science of regeneration, and the Illiad was an allegory of spiritual significance.
 

 
Both Anna Kingsford and Maitland were exponents of re- incarnation, which in the West at that time was almost unheard of. In sleep he saw the distant view of a City which he was told was Thebes, and by his side was a  man whom he recognized as  Anna Kingsford saying that it  was in the City's temples which they could see  under  the Egyptian sky and amidst the desert, they had been initiated together. Afterwards came a confirmation, when they saw in the studio of an artist friend who had been in Egypt, the very scene in the dream, with certain details noticed by Maitland during his dream. Anna Kingsford's con- nection with Egypt was illus- trated in a vision of herself with a band of Initiates in procession, chanting the hymn to "Iacchos", which she remembered on waking, and has recorded in "Clothed with the Sun".
She came to regard such experiences as a function of memory, and she was told after another vision in which she passed through the  heaven worlds, and saw the ancient gods of Scandinavia, Greece, Egypt, China and India, where at different times she  had incarnated. This vision culmi- nated in seeing the Form of Adonai, as deity standing erect, with his right hand aloft and the universe streaming therefrom,
 

propelled by the omnipotent repulsion of his Will back to his left hand, which was depressed and set backward, the universe returned, drawn by the attraction of his Love. The following statement of Shri Meher Baba will throw light on such experiences: "You have within your Self the planes, the planets and the entire Universe, but you do not know it."
The myths of the gods have their counterpart in the spiritual history of the Soul, whose pathway through evolution, they mirror, as on earth the Soul experiences the limitations of matter; though subject to conflict in the Celestial world, they are untrammelled by our  limitations in the flesh. The Hymns to the Gods, by Anna Kingsford, depict their functions on different planes, behind and beneath all mani- festation, whether in the Celestial or physical worlds, is that unchangeable: ''Original Being ... in Whom were all the Gods comprehended... Whose Nature, no mind create can fathom .. One only, the Uncreate and Self- subsistent…Whose Name is unspeakable."
Zeus was shown to  represent on the planes, space or ether, which pervades all but is form- less, and thus is the father of all, unmanifest: Demeter as outer substance, represents the mani- fest, and from this union
 

 
is born man's psychic nature, in which that which is volatile, becomes fixed, the astral coagu- lated in the material. Thus the tragedy of Persephone, born of Zeus and Demeter, who eats the pomegranate, (the symbol of Illusion) and is bound for one  half of the year to the nether regions, but is allowed free  during the other, lest she be utterly lost to her Mother, who intercedes for her.
Zeus and Hera, the rulers -of the celestial world, represent the balance attained on a more spiritual plane,  whereby perfection is realized through complete detachment in the midst of duality. The synthesis of the outer and the inner, is secured in the perfected  consciousness  of the One.
These truths Anna Kingsford was shown, objectively, by her Illuminator, in the form of Hermes, and also through her daimon or genius, or minister, as he preferred to be shown. The genius belongs to the order of Seraphs, and is the link between man's consciousness and the celestial realm of the gods,  and his office is to guide, admonish and Illumine. The Gods, she was told, had once been men, and  were perfected. Many of their names are lost in the mists of  time, but they include Osiris, Mithras, Krishna, Buddha and Jesus, the Saviours of  mankind. In the creed of
 
the Church is embodied the spritual history of the Sons of God, the mysteries of the seven spheres and the seven spirits of God, and consequently of the seven planets and their  Gods.  The Gods represent "Centres of Systems, Bonds of Graces, Trees of Life, Suns of Many Worlds called in the Hebrew  Uriel, and  in the Greek,  Phoebus,  the 'Bright One of God', and the  Spirit of all the Gods is  that  Spirit of Wisdom, the Light  which Adonai created on  the First Day".
The parallel evolution of form and consciousness, which Shri Meher Baba has described in his Divine Theme and which is in the Appendix of the book entitled "The Perfect Master" wherein the Soul assumes form in order to become conscious of the phenomenal world, Anna Kingsford traces in the spheres before the finest form of matter, through the action thereon of the centrifugal or accelerating force upon that which is within, that substance which is before ether, and thus not material. This she regarded as "spiritual"  (the aspects of the subtle and mental worlds and planes that Shri Baba has indicated and described in their relationship to man's evolution, were not within her ken).
As manifestation is dual,  it  was explained to her, the action  of  the  centripetal  or  moderating
 

 
force was immediately set in motion, in the opposite direction to the centrifugal force, whence polarization follows, and through that a higher cons- ciousness ensues, and so the process continues. The  Hymns to the Gods depict their mani- festations and activities through- out the microcosm, man, and macrocosm, the universe, and also from the unseen, into the realm of organic and inorganic chemistry, that kingdom of matter in which the scientist of that day concentrated
 

his search for the Secret of Life. Thus she gave an unbroken link between God and man through science and religion.
The descent of the soul into matter was to her a figurative term which infers "A passage from Being to Existence... and the elaboration of individual souls through development in material conditions. Time is a fiction, not a reality and con- sequently Creation is a divine state which Being assumes by means of  what  the Hindus  call
Maya.”
 

(To be continued)