Editorial 
BY THE MEHER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 
The Meher Baba Journal has come into existence through the earnest enquiries relating to Shri Meher Baba by seekers of spiritual truth and the desire of so many of his disciples throughout the East and West, to keep in closer touch with his activities. To these former, he is merely a name towards which they have turned for light, yet know little of this radiant personage and still less of his varied activities. To the latter, whom the Master contacted on his numerous journeys throughout the world, he is best known by the simple appellative Baba, which name from the Persian means "Father" or "Friend." The spiritual title Sadguru, or Perfect Master, is well recognized in the East, especially India with its rich heritage of spirituality, to connote one who has transcended the planes of duality and is "God-realized." In the book entitled The Perfect Master by C. B. Purdom  of London, which is the life story of Shri Meher Baba, Mr. Purdom has defined it for his Western readers as follows: "The title 'Perfect Master' is that by which Shri Meher Baba is known. It means one who himself reached the goal to which he leads or directs others. It means a teacher who himself practised his own teachings and attained its fruits. It means one who, pointing to God, has himself realized God." 
   Eight men and women, Easterners and Westerners from varied walks of life, are dedicating themselves to this task of answering the call and Shri Meher Baba himself has endowed the group with the name Meher Editorial Committee for the purpose of the publication of this Journal. It is a happy fact that C. V. Sampath Aiyangar, late of Madras Judicial Service and editor of the former Meher Gazette, which is now in≠corporated with the Meher Baba Journal is continuing his editorial activity as one of the editors of this Journal. 

 
   Our monthly issues will each contain an article by Shri Meher Baba. It is our aim to publish facts tending to demon≠strate the Master's Divine Knowledge and Love, his direct influence in the unfoldment of life on the Path, his guidance in the ordinary lives of people, his psychological healings and physical help and healings, besides his philoso≠phy and teachings. It is intended as well to publish past and present impressions and diaries of his followers in the East and West. Furthermore will be printed the life stories of great Saints of India and elsewhere whom Shri Meher Baba calls his "blessed selves" and who, though born in a particular country, belong to mankind as its greatest patri≠mony. Articles will be included on various other subjects such as religion, science, art, literature, music, which in their broad sense, according to Shri Meher Baba's teaching, are all spiritual expressions when rightly interpreted. 
    It may be of interest to our readers to know that since July 1925, Shri Meher Baba has observed complete silence; he communicates by means of an alphabet board. He reads and can speak five languages, among them English. In his presence all barriers of thought communication seem removed as his understanding is universal. Therefore it is most common that those who write their impressions and quote the words of Shri Meher Baba in these pages, use such term as "Baba said", although it should be clearly understood by the readers that the Master always spells out his words on the alphabet board. His silence is for profound spiritual reasons and is a prelude to his manifestation. 
   Shri Meher Baba has stated in regard to his mission: "I intend bringing to≠gether all religions and cults like beads on one string and revitalize them for individual and collective needs." 
