that the Master's loving service inspires, until He became lost to view, and they were left with the memory of that never to be forgotten time. 
From the mountain heights, the Master saw the peril of his disciples on the distant lake in the storm, and came to their aid, walking on the waters, ever at their side to meet their needs. His own life in them, and they in Him. 
There are those in England and other parts of Europe and the West who have experienced Baba's presence and His power to calm their storm-tossed hearts, as vividly as did those early followers of the Master. Some of His Indian disciples were also faced with the problem of food for guests they had not anticipated, who had arrived in such large numbers that their supplies could not cope with, and they went to Baba in consternation, but He just told them to continue their preparations and not to worry, and all would be well. And so it was; everyone ate heartily and was satisfied, and those who before had been so concerned saw that Baba had met their need in His own way. 
Such events bring back the outstanding events in the life of Jesus with an intensity that His disciples experienced at the time. The unexpected needs an insuper­able difficulty, the sudden act of faith, in carrying out the Master's word, and the realization of His Grace within and without are events without a parallel. 
Baba' s birthday celebrations at Nasik in 1937, amidst the crowds who gathered in thousands to receive His Grace and gifts of food and clothing and passed before Him, as all day He took the dust from their feet to His own forehead, were another instance to remind those present in the East for the first time, of the life of Jesus. In the evening, after the fatigue and strain of dealing with such a mass of people in whom the Master sees His Self as well as their own limited ego, His white clad figure could be seen under the Indian night sky, passing silently down the garden, ever ready to bless the waiting soul by His side, as He had already done for the multitude. It was a super-human work, and He had been fasting for weeks beforehand. 

While taking the dust from their feet He took also their sanskaras as the servant of all. 
Jesus took the role of servant, when washing His disciples' feet, and at the Baptism John recognized that the position should have been reversed, but performed his part at the Master's word, "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." 
Ever-mindful of the humblest, He saw the poor widow, whose gift of her all, a single mite, would have been unnoticed but for Him amidst the grand ostentatious offerings of the rich; and there is the parallel of Baba with a poor widow in London, one of 70 persons whom we brought to Him at His office during a short afternoon. As she entered the room wonderingly, for she had only just heard of Him, Baba wrote on his board, "What a wonderful soul," and well we who knew her long life of selfless service, and how, during the crisis in the life of her mistress, she had given all of her life's savings, could have endorsed His words. She just gazed at His face, silently, and left with His blessing; but three years after, He sent her this message from India: "Think of Me more. Cheer others. I know how she feels and will help her always onwards." Often one of Baba's people would go to her lonely tenement dwelling in the poorest part of London, and speak of that visit, and her awakening through the Master was the crown of a life of pious unwavering selflessness. 
Another instance in which Baba's work recalls the effect of Jesus upon the social outcast brought to Him whose love transformed her life, whereas the Law would enforce stoning for her but not her partner in misfortune, occurred in the North of India, dur­ing a great religious festival. Two women, whose manner of living was well-known, seeing the Master, were drawn to follow Him, and turning to them He invited them to enter the house where He was stay­ing. Weeping, they soon declared they could never again return to their old life, and with His Grace they went out again into the world to face life afresh. Baba has said, "When one is meant for spiritual advancement, one has either love or lust to the extreme. This lust must be converted into love. What is lust but a craving for the physical senses, and love is the craving of the soul." 

Seeing that the perils on the Path are so insidious, especially as the pilgrim advances through the inner planes which the temptation of Jesus deals with, the Masters always emphasise the importance of obedience to their instructions during the training of those whom they accept for advancement in spirituality. In that perspective, Baba has said that it is of more importance than devotion, a hard proposition for the Western or modern mind that has had to battle for freedom from superstition and outworn creeds. Jesus said, "Not everyone that sayeth unto Me 'Lord, Lord' shall enter the Kingdom, but He that doeth the Will of My Father...” Martha, the sister of Lazarus, questioned the Master's command to roll away the stone from her brother's grave, drawing from Him the rebuke that He had promised she should see the glory of God, if she would believe. Her earnest affirmation, which the evangelist records, preceded their arrival at the sepulchre, when she had acclaimed Jesus as the Christ, perfectly sincere as it was, at the time, needed the Master's Grace to transform her mental attitude into unshakable loyalty and obedience, in spite of the witness of her senses to the contrary which she anticipated after the body of her brother had been in the grave for three days. 
There are indications in the gospel story of some of the surprises the Spiritual Master has in store for those who would join His company. Jesus said to his disciples: "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, but I go that I may awake him out of sleep”; immediately afterwards He added, as they did not understand, "Lazarus is dead," a puzzling combination which the evangelist endeavours to explain. Sometimes He asked them questions, though He knew that in their hearts and minds, in a way that must remind readers of the Jataka tales of Buddha of how the Enlightened One, perceiving that He could use the discussion of His disciples for their instruction, would suddenly enter their room, and ask what they were talking about. Baba has explained that while the Master is asking the question, He is dealing with the latent sanskaras or tendencies in their minds through His subtle working, which might otherwise retard progress. 

Some critics have objected to alterations in a Master's plans, as a sign of indecision or weakness, but Baba has explained that His work on the physical plane serves as a scaffolding to a building, for the spiritual Master's work is on the inner planes, and when completed there, the outer "scaffold" is removed being unnecessary. He may administer some shock to awaken the mind of one whose rigid mentality is an obstacle to further progress. Interpolated in the gospels are passages which some critics have recognised by com­paring our version with the earliest MSS. Jesus had sent His disciples to the feast at Jerusalem, and said, "I go not up to the feast”; but after­wards He went up another way. This is the earliest version from which contemporary critics argued against Him. In our present text the word “now” appears after “not" which removes the objection raised by those opponents. Even if their version were correct and Jesus had acted as indicated, it was for His own purposes; He was expected by the people, and some were on the alert to trap Him again. Baba explains the way a Sadguru works in the world, by the simile of a child reaching out for a sweetmeat and becoming wedged in the aperture where it was concealed. The Sadguru, who is free and unconditioned, uses as sweetmeat (maya) also, but in such a way as to attract the child's attention to the dainty morsel so as to continue his struggles through which He effects the child's release. 
Jesus used the Pharisees' con­demnation of the woman taken in adultery to confute them. "Let him who is without sin amongst you, cast the first stone." After they had gone out one by one, it was through her own reply to His next question that she won her acquittal: 
"Where are now thine accusers? Hath no man condemned thee?" And she said: "No man, Lord,'' words uttered from a heart that already was responding to the outpouring of the Divine Love that feeds the soul of man. In His final words, the Master gave her the seal of for­giveness: 

"Neither do I condemn thee; go and sin no more.'' 
In this case Jesus had paused, to write something on the ground in the dust. Sometimes He used some outer material expression for His inner spiritual work, as in the case of the man born blind, when He made clay with His spittle, for the eyes. It is interesting in that instance of healing, to observe how the mental perception of the man, when healed, was awakened, and he was able to tackle the learned upholders of religion, and refute them from their own arguments against the Master, clearly through the inspiration of His Power. When they had cast him out of the syna­gogue, Jesus found him again, and revealed His own divine nature to him, so that his own spiritual healing was attained, and he believed in the Master. 
Of those who oppose or speak ill of Him, Baba said: "They should not be hated. 
As I oft say, they, too, are un­consciously serving My cause. Just as you (His disciples standing by) are keeping connection with Me, so they, too, oft think of Me. "...The hypocricy of the Pharisees called for the severest rebukes of the Master, whose sin, He said, consisted, not in being blind, but while blind saying "I see". On the Cross, when they had in ignorance of that full import of what they had done in providing the opposition essential to the deepest manifes­tation of divine love, He prayed, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." Jesus had commanded all to love their enemies, and the essence of His life and His teaching to His disciples, the masses and the rulers is the same, varied according to their outlook and capacity in the variety of His ways of the presentation of the same fact. 
To an enquirer in Zurich, Baba said, "Jesus taught what religion is ... to find God within ... through Love, and that is the message of the Master to this age and the meaning of His Life.'' 

. 
