

You Must Believe It* 

BY Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Once a despotic king from Northern India, given to all sorts of whims and vagaries, ordered the court clowns on a certain festive occasion to play the part of a real and live tiger. Failure to com≠ply meant death, and the clowns knew the despot for what he was. 

They were at their wits end. Every passing minute of the approaching moment increased their anxiety and perplexity. One amongst the clowns who was an advanced soul, observing their sorry plight, comforted his com≠panions by saying, "Don't worry, let the time come; everything will be all right."

    The stage was set; the durbar hall was gaily decorated; the king in the best of oriental splendour was seated on the golden throne with his small sonó the heir apparentóby his side. Other notables and dignitaries packed the hall, keyed up to an high pitch of ex≠citement to witness the impossible per≠formance. 

After the preliminaries and side roles of the clowns, the important item of the day, 'the tiger' was announced. At a given signal, the particular clown leapt into the arena, metamorphosed into a live and real tiger. The audience was dumbfounded and could hardly believe their eyes. Before they could recover themselves, the tiger made straight for the king's son, dragged him down, and tore him to pieces. When the king realized that the prince was really dead, he ordered the clowns, on pain of death, that he (prince) be restored to life. The clown, who played the tiger, said that this was only possible if someone played the part of Christ realistically, and the only one, at the moment, capable of doing it was Shams-e-Tabriz, a God-mad person≠ality, roaming about in the vicinity. Uttering this bit of information the clown disappeared. 

Shams was traced down. As he was known to be fond of music, he was lured to the 


king's palace on promise of a musical  Knowledge, All Power, All Bliss. This ' '  

feast. The king, very respectfully,  state is Absolute , devoid of attributes.  

beseeched the Saint to play the Christ  qualities, motives and actions. Hence,  

for the sake of his son and heir. Shams  the action or order of bringing to life  

agreed and kicked at the dead body  the dead, cannot be attributed to Godó  

thrice saying: ("Qum-be-Iznillah")  the Absolute, the Impersonal. Action or  

"Rise in the name of God." The prince showed no signs of returning life. Once  attribute of doing or undoing things belongs to Personal GodóDivine "I " ó  

again he kicked at the dead body and  the Sadguruóthe Qutubóthe embod≠ 

said angrily: ("Qum-be Izni") "Rise by my order. " The prince immediately  iment of all attributes. The Divine 'I', through Shams, worked the miracle  

came to life and everyone concerned  narrated above.  

breathed a sigh of relief. The orthodox  One may also ask as to why the  

divines of the day came to know of this  particular clown did not bring to life  

miraculous incident. Treating the ut≠ the prince, when he could become a  

terance "Rise by my order" ("Qum-be≠ tiger and kill him. The reason is obvi≠ 

lznillah") as rank blasphemy, and how,  ous. The clown not having achieved '  

unmindful of his spiritual state, Shams  'Perfection could not risk his spiritual  

was skinned alive is another story.  downfall. The part of becoming a tiger  

Here it would he interesting for the '  was forced upon him, by circum≠ 

spiritually minded to know why order  stances, and was meant to save the life  

in the name of God ("Qum-be-lznillah")  of his companions. There was no self,  

failed and the personal order ("Qum-be≠ working in it. The second act of raising  

lznillah") by Shams succeeded in  the dead, would have been deliberate,  

bringing the dead prince to life. The  the asserting of his psychic Ego. Hence  

term "Allah" in Sufism signifies the im≠ he very wisely disappeared, leaving the  

personal aspect of God, which is All  job to be finished by the Perfect Master  

Shams-e-Tabriz.  