ALL persons have to pass through the state of bondage; but this period of bondage is not to be looked upon as a meaningless episode in the evolution of life. One has to experience being caged if he is to appreciate freedom. If in the entire span of its life, the fish has not come out of water even once it has no chance of appreciating 
the value of water. From its birth till its death it has lived only in water; and it is not in a position to understand what water really means for its being. But if it is taken out of water even for a moment it longs for water and becomes by that experience qualified for appreciating the importance of water. In the same way, if life had been throughout free and had known no bondage it would have missed the real significance of freedom. The experience of spiritual bondage and the intense desire to be free from it are both a preparation for the full enjoyment of the freedom which is to come. 
As the fish which is taken out of water longs for going back to water, the aspirant who has perceived the goal longs 
262 
for being united with God. In fact, the longing to go back to the source is present in each being from the very time that it gets separated from the source by the veil of 

ignorance: but it is unconscious till the aspirant enters the Path. One can in a sense become accustomed to ignorance just as a person in a train might get 
accustomed to the darkness of the tunnel through which the train has been passing for some time: but there is even then a definite discomfort and a vague and undefinable sense of restlessness owing to the feeling that something is missing. This something is from the very beginning apprehended as that which has tremendous significance for him. In the stages of dense ignorance, this something is often inadvertently identified with the variegated things of this mundane world: but when the experience of this world is sufficiently mature the repeated disillusionment in relation to them puts the man on the right track for the thing which is missing. From that moment he seeks a Reality which is deeper than the changing forms and this moment might aptly be described as the first initiation of the aspirant. From the moment of initiation into the Path, the longing to unite with the source from which he has been separated becomes articulate and intense. Just as the entrained person in the tunnel longs for light all the more intensely after he sees a streak of light coming from the other end, the person who has got a glimpse of the goal longs to hasten towards it with all the speed which he can command. 
On the spiritual Path there are six stations, the seventh station being the terminus or the goal. Each intermediate station is in its own way a kind of an 
imaginative anticipation of the 
goal. The veil which separates 
man from God consists of false 
imagination: and this veil of 
false imagination has, as it were, many folds. Before entering the Path the man is shrouded in this veil of manifold imagination with the result that he cannot even entertain the thought of his being 

other than a separate and enclosed finite individual. The ego-consciousness has crystallised out of the working of the manifold false imagination, and the conscious longing for union with God is the first shaking of the entire structure of the ego which has come to be built through the period of the false working of imagination. 
The traversing of the spiritual Path consists in the undoing of the results of the false working of imagination, or the dropping of the several folds of the veil which has created the sense of unassailable separateness and unredeemable isolation. So far, the man had firmly clung to separate existence and secured it behind the formidable walls of thick ignorance: but from now on he enters, as it were, into some kind of communication with the larger Reality. The more he communes with Reality the thinner becomes the veil of ignorance and with the gradual wearing out of separateness and egoism there comes to him a greater sense of merging in the larger Reality. 
The building up of the sense of aloofness is a result of flights of imagination: and therefore breaking through the self-created sense of aloofness and being 
united with the Reality is 
secured through reversing the 
false working of imagination. 
The act of getting rid of 
imagination altogether may be compared with the act of awakening from deep sleep: and the different stages in the process of getting rid of false imagination might be compared with the dreams which often serve as a bridge between deep sleep and full wakefulness. The process of getting rid of the manifold working of false imagination is gradual and has seven stages. The shedding of one fold of the veil of imagination is decidedly an approximation towards the Truth and the Light: but it does not amount to becoming one with Reality as it merely means renouncing the more false imagination in favour of the less false imagination. There are different degrees of the falseness of imagination according to the degrees of the sense of aloofness constituted by ego-consciousness. Each stage in 

264 
the process of getting rid of false imagination is a definite wearing out of the Ego. But all the intermediate stages on the Path until the final realisation of the goal consist of leaving one flight of imagination and having another flight of imagination: they do not amount to the cessation of imagination. 
These flights of imagination do not bring about any real change in the true being of the Self as it is. What changes is not the Self but its idea of what it is. 

Suppose in a daydream or an imaginative phantasy you imagine yourself to be in China while your body is actually in India. When the train of this 

imaginative phantasy comes to an end you realise that your body is actually not in China but in India. From the subjective point of view, this is like returning from China to India. In the same way, the gradual non-identification with the body and the progressive identification with the Universal Soul is comparable with the actual traversing of the Path, though in fact the different intermediate stages on the Path are all equally creations of the play of imagination. 
The six stages of ascending are thus all within the 
domain of imagination: but at each stage, the breaking through the growth of the sense of aloofness and the sense of merging in the larger reality are both so considerable and 
definite that the person often has a pseudo-sense of realisation. Just as a person who wants to climb the mountain comes upon a deep valley and is so fascinated by the sight of the valley that he forgets the real goal and believes for the time being that has arrived at the goal, the aspirant also mistakes the intermediate stages for the goal itself. But a person who is really in earnest about the climbing of the mountain realises after some time that the valley is really meant to be crossed: and the aspirant also in like manner sooner or later realises that the intermdiate stage is meant to be transcended. 
The pseudo-sense of realisation which comes at the intermediate stages is like a man’s dreaming that he has become awake from sleep without actually being awake. After becoming awake he realises that his first feeling of awakening was really a dream. 
Each definite stage of advancement represents a state of consciousness: and the advancement from one state of consciousness to another proceeds side by side with the crossing of the inner planes. Thus there are six intermediate planes and states 

of consciousness which have to be experienced before getting established in the seventh plane which is the end of the journey and where there is a final realisation of the God-state. The plane is comparable with a railway station where the train halts for some time; and the state of consciousness is comparable to the movements of the passenger after getting down at the station. 
After entering a new plane of consciousness a person usually takes some time before he can freely function on that plane. As there is a radical change in the total conditions of mental life the person experiences a sort of paralysis of mental activity, which is known as 
Samadhi. When the pilgrim enters a new plane he merges into that plane before he can expenence the state which is characteristic of that plane. Just as a pilgrim who is tired by the strain of the journey some­times goes to sleep, consciousness which has made the effort ot ascending to a new plane goes through a period of lowered mental activity comparable to sleep. But at the same time the Samadhi is fundamentally different from sleep, because in sleep a person is totally unconscious whereas in Samadhi he is conscious of bliss or light or power, although he is unconscious of his body or the surroundings. After a period of comparative stillness, the mind begins to function on the new plane and experiences a state of consciousness which is utterly different from the state which it has left behind. 

266 
When the aspirant enters a new plane he gets merged into it and along with the lowering down of mental activity he experiences a substantial diminution 
in the ego-life. This curtailment 

Each Stage on the of the ego-life is different from Path is a Curtail-the final annihilation of the Ego, ment of the Ego-life which takes place at the seventh 
plane. But like the final annihilation of the seventh plane the different stages of the curtailment of the Ego at the Intermediate six planes deserve special mention owing to their relative importance. In the Sufi spiritual tradition, the final annihilation of the Ego is described as Fana-Fillah: and the earlier samadhis of the six planes of duality have also been recognised as kinds of Fana, since they also involve a partial annihilation of the Ego. 
Through all these Fanas of ascending order, there is the continuity of progression towards the final ‘Fana-Fillah’: and each of them has some special characteristic. When the pilgrim arrives at the first plane he experiences his first merging or Fana which consists in the minor annihilation of the Ego. The pilgrim is temporarily lost to his limited individuality and experiences bliss. Many pilgrims who thus get merged in the second plane think that they have realised God and get stuck in the first plane. But if the pilgrim keeps himself free from self-delusion or comes to realise that his attainment is realy a transitional phase in his journey, he advances further on the spiritual Path and arrives at the second plane. The merging into the second plane is called “Fana-e-Batili” or the annihilation of the False. The pilgrim is now absorbed in bliss and infinite light. Some think that they have attained the goal and get stranded in the second plane; but others who keep themselves free from self-delusion march onwards and enter into the third plane. The merging into the third plane is called “Fana-e-Zaheri” or the annihilation of the apparent. Here the pilgrim loses for days all consciousness of the body or the world and experiences infinite power. But since he has no consciousness of the world he has 
no occasion for the 
expression of his power. This is Videha Samadhi or the state of divine coma. Consciousness is now completely withdrawn from the entire world. 
If the pilgrim advances still further he arrives at the fourth plane. The merging into the fourth plane is called “Fana-e-Malakuti” or the annihilation leading 

towards Freedom. The pilgrim 
experiences a peculiar state of 
consciousness at the fourth plane since he now not only feels infinite power but has also plenty of occasions for the expression of that power. He can know everything. He can, for example, know what any one situated in any part of the globe is thinking or doing. Further, he has not only occasions for the use of his powers but has a definite inclination to express them. If he falls a prey to this temptation he goes on expressing powers and gets caught up in the alluring possibilities of the fourth plane. The fourth plane is for this reason one of the most difficult and dangerous plane to cross. The pilgrim is never spiritually safe and has always the possibility of a reversion until he has successfully crossed the fourth plane and arrived at the fifth plane. 
The merging into the fifth plane is called “Fana­e-Jabaruti” or the annihilation of all desires. Here the incessant activity of the lower intellect comes to a 
stand-still. He does not 'think' in 
the ordinary way: and yet he is 
indirectly a source of many 
thoughts inspired in others. He 
sees, but not with the physical eyes. Mind speaks with mind and there is neither worry nor doubt. He is now spiritually safe and beyond the possibility of a downfall: and yet many a pilgrim on this exalted plane find it difficult to resist the delusion that they have attained God-hood. In his self-delusion he thinks and says, "I am God" and believes himself to have arrived at the end of the spiritual Path. But if he moves on he perceives his mistake and advances to the sixth plane. The 


268 
merging into the sixth plane is called “Fana-e-Mahabubi” or the annihilation of the self in the Beloved. 
Now the pilgrim sees God directly and clearly as an ordinary person sees the different things of this world: and this continued perception and enjoyment of God does not suffer a break even for an instant. Yet he does not become one with God, the Infinite. 
If the pilgrim ascends to the seventh plane he experiences the last merging which is called “Fana-Filla” or the final annihilation of the self in God. 
Through this merging the 
The Fana-Fillah or pilgrim loses his separate the Nirvikalpa Sa-existence and becomes madhi is a State of permanently united with God. Conscious God-hood He is now one with God and 
experiences himself as being none other than God himself. This seventh plane Fana-Filla is the terminus of the spiritual Path, the goal of all search and endeavour. It is the Sahaj Samadhi or the Nirvikalpa Samadhi which is characteristic of conscious God-hood. It is the only real awakening. The pilgrim has now reached the other shore of the vast ocean of imagination, and realises that this last Truth is the only Truth and that all the other stages on the Path are entirely illusory. He has arrived at the final destination. 


