
BABA'S STAY AND WORK IN 
JUBBULPORE 
Baba's work with the God-mad 
continued with added vigour in 
Jubbulpore, where a number of 

these were collected from all parts of the district. His faithful band of workers, including his own brother, Jal, and the ever vigilant K. and Chg., ran about on errands everywhere as directed, even in the exacting heat of the scorching sun in summer, and brought a number of these to 
Baba. With his usual delightful smile and that happy expres­sion which always rejoices in service to these true lovers of God—the masts—Baba admini­stered his personal divine touch and treatment, and poured out his love to these spiritually-dazed souls, searched out and gathered from different parts of the surrounding country.  Except for very few interviews given only in exceptional cases, this seemed to be the only impor- 

tant work he did during the period. THE MYSTICAL MURMURS OF THE MASTS 
Amongst those masts brought over to Jubbulpore during April and May were some of the more advanced souls who, according to Baba, were the appointed spiritual agents of the places—towns or districts—where they lived, and even in their present mentally ab­normal condition, carried on the work assigned to each by the leaders of the spiritual heirarchy. Their recognition of the Master and the delight they felt and expressed in his august presence with their typical gestures and expressions were a privilege to watch. I have already given in the last issue a few of these mystical murmurs of the masts which are evidence of their higher con­sciousness of the planes in which they are. Many more of these interesting and significant utter­ances could be quoted, but I will select two of these which confirm what has already been said of their recognition of Baba's spiritual state. One of these, a woman saint highly respected in her own town, was brought to Baba by Chg., with great diffi­culty and after days of persuasion. She was of a reticent type and rarely spoke. The only words through which she once gave vent to what she felt after looking at Baba with a fixed gaze for minutes were, 
"Daryamese thoda pani hamko bhi pila dey,” 
meaning, "Why don't you let me have even a few drops of water from the Ocean of Divinity that you are?" This refers to the Ocean of Bliss that Baba eternally enjoys. She requested the Master to be merciful to throw at least a few drops out of the Ocean to a beggar that stood at his door. 
Another advanced soul in whose search Baba and party went to Aurangabad (Deccan) on their return journey to Ahmed­nagar from Jubbulpore, when brought in presence of Baba and lovingly caressed by him, at once spoke out, 
"Ag lag gai—bhabhuka lag gaya," 
meaning, "There is intense heart burning. You have set me aflame." This signified the re­awakening of his soul through the personal contact of the Master who had rekindled the fire of the Divine Love, which suddenly became intense and unbearable. When being fed by Baba and asked by others where and at whose hands he was having his food, he replied, 

"Allah ke darbar me aya aur khana khaya," 
meaning, "I came to the court (darbar) of Allah (God) and ate my food at His place." These remarks speak for themselves. 
* * * 
THE CENTRE SCHEME Developments in the question about the proposed Spiritual Centre to be established on that side went on with the enthusiastic participation of the supporters and advocates of this scheme at Mandla with a view to give it a practical shape. 
     To enlighten the public on this side of the country about the life, teaching and work of Baba, private talks were given to a few of the leaders in Mandla who were interested in the Master's scheme of the Universal Ashram. But to create a wider interest, they all felt something had to be said in public, especially at a place where the proposed Centre was to be established. For the first time in the history of our group, speeches in public by the Master's disciples were arranged. On the 12th May at Mandla three of the Master's Eastern and Western dis­ciples—Princess Norina Matcha­belli, Countess Nadine Tolstoy and Dr. C. D. Deshmukh, M. A., Ph.D., Lecturer in Philosophy at the Morris College, Nagpur— delivered the initial lectures of a series to be given on that side. A summary of these, explaining the universal aspect of the unique institution, is published elsewhere in this issue. 
RETURN TO MEHERABAD On the 15th of May, Baba left Jubbulpore for "Meherabad" colony at Ahmednagar, with his group, by road. The group was divided into two parties, one driving in a car and the other in the big bus. This being the summer season and the country through which they had to pass being in the tropical zone, it was arranged that they all travel during the cool hours of the morning—from 4 to 9 or 10—and sometimes in the evening from 5 to 9 according to the distance they 

had to traverse or the station where they had to halt. As the route selected touched Aurang­abad, Baba gave the group an opportunity to see the famous Ellora caves, which in the august company of the Master was a great inspiration to all. One from amongst the Western group who accompanied the Master on this tour is writing a detailed account of this return tour to Meherabad. So we will pass on with the mere mention of the places they passed through, viz., Nagpur, Badnera, Khamgaon, Ellora via Jalna, Khuldabad, Aurangabad, and via Ahmednagar, Poona and Talegaon to Lonavala, a beau­tiful hill station about 80 miles from Bombay, where the party stayed for four days in the cool bracing climate. Some of the members of Baba’s first and old mandali from Poona. and Talegaon came to meet him here and had some interesting talks and discussions. 
Baba. and party left Lonavala. on the 25th morning, visited Talegaon en route where the party had breakfast at Mr. A. K. Abdulla's residence, and left immediately, arriving “Meher­abad" 11 a. m. The 
Master is at "Meherabad" since then. 
A PARTING MESSAGE Speaking of the Master's divine influence on others and of the intense love, deep devotion and unflinching faith it creates even in the cultured disciples of the West, reminds me here of a very touching incident whose significance will be appreciated by all true lovers. It is a loving message for the Master which one of the Western disciples gave me on board the "Conte Verde" at the moment of part­ing in April last in Bombay. 
"You may keep Baba in person here with you, but I take real Baba with me. Tell Baba, I go with this body, but my spirit is always with you. There is nothing in the world like Baba." 
This comes from the depths of a heart that has known and experienced love as very few have, in both its aspects— materially in the life of the world with her loving husband and children and other dear ones of her family, and also spiritually in the true divine love inspired by the Master. She has known the Master for years, has met him several times in the West, came to India in June last with three others to stay, and had been with him here for a period of ten months. She was ordered to go home (Switzerland) in April last to attend to her family duties and do her other work there. But for the family she would have stayed with the Master all her life. That is her only desire. But the Master has ordained otherwise. Giving the disciples experience of both the aspects of life on earth and of the life divine is one of the fundamental principles of the Master's teaching and training. Much as he would like to emphasize the importance of the life of the spirit, untouched by maya, he never advocates shirking of one's duties in life in the world, towards one's family and other acquaintances. Hundreds of his devotees would like to give up everything, to stay with him in his Ashram with all its discipline and hardships, but they are told to do their duties to those of their dear ones in the world and are sent home. They abide by his wishes and instructions, and go to live in the world, but have always their eyes directed towards him. Their lives are guided by the Master. True to the spirit of the Master's teaching, they learn to live in the world, but try not to be of it. 

The above message speaks for itself of Divine Love awak­ened by the Master in the hearts of others. This lady is one of the many recipients of this Divine Grace from the Master. AN INTERVIEW AND EXPLA­
NATION ON "PERFECTION" 
During one of the rare inter­views given by Baba in Jub­bulpore, the important subject on "Perfection" was discussed, and Baba gave an interesting explanation which we repro­duce hereunder: 
Just as everything in the domain of duality is based on the proportion of degrees, so also is perfection based on degrees when concerned with duality. Bad and good, vice and virtue, weakness and strength are all based on degrees when considered with duality. Bad and good, vice and virtue, weakness and strength are all aspects of duality, but in reality it is unity of degrees. Bad is not bad but good in its lowest degrees, so is weakness no weakness but strength in its lowest degree. Perfection has also its degrees when compared with imper­fection. So you will find one perfection not including every perfection when in duality. One man perfect in science won't be found perfect in singing, and one perfect in singing won't be found perfect in painting. So these perfections are under the domain of duality. 

Have you ever heard of "perfect crimes?" When murder is so cleverly perpetrated as not to leave a single clue behind, it is called a "perfect crime". So even in crimes and so-called sins, there is perfection. 
Now the perfection attained by spiritually perfect souls is not in the domain of duality. All these relative perfections, explained above, come within the scope of "intellect", but the perfection (of spiritually perfect souls) is beyond intellect. When one is perfect spiritually, one knows that nothing exists except God alone, and so everything that exists under intellect and under the domain of duality is "illusion" to him. So for the perfect man, nothing exists but God; science, art, music, weakness, murders are all dreams to him. 
His knowledge, his perfection is one indivisible existence. Now when this perfect soul, for spiritual reasons, wants to use all his power, knowledge, he does it purely for the sake of spiritual upliftment. Then he puts universal mind in that subject and knows all, even though the outward expression is not necessary, because all languages come first from the mental limit, and are then ex­pressed orally. But he knows the mind of everyone, so any language, even before it is uttered, he knows the purport. So with everything—science, art, etc.—if he wants, he can know even before it is mani­fested. But he does it only when necessary. 
Question 
Does Baba believe in the theory of previous births, as mentioned in the Bhagvat Gita? Answer 
Yes, it is all on the law of re­incarnation that all existence is based. Question 
Lord Krishna was materially perfect too—so are you also not perfect materially? Answer That includes all perfections, 

but there is no need of expression.  now touched the main issue, and,  
Krishna was perfect spiritually.  in his masterly way, brought out  
That means he was perfect in  from Mr. X things that created  
everything, but he never  such mental confusion and mess.  
expressed the material side of  He started with the initial inquiry  
perfection, as there would he no  as to the object of this visit.  
meaning of perfection, and  Baba  
because it would be all confusion.  What is that you really desire  
He would have shown himself a  and need?  
perfect drunkard, a perfect sinner,  Mr. X  
a perfect rogue. But that would  I am in search for a Perfect  
have shocked the world. So he  Teacher who could lead me to  
didn't express it. So he was a  perfection and satisfy me.   
perfect drunkard, perfect sinner,  Baba  
perfect rogue perfect in every- And I am looking for a perfect  
thing—must have been—and a  disciple who could satisfy me, but  
perfect God—above all.  I can't see one around ... What do  
Question  you really long for?  
But was it necessary for him to  Mr. X  
show himself a perfect murderer?  (Confused in expression) I want  
Answer  through material means and ways  
So I said—when it is necessary,  to attain to spiritual perfection.  
these perfect souls express their  But first I must find ways and  
perfection in everything. I can be  means for the starving country- 
perfect in any mode of life I have  men and then launch on the spir­ 
to adopt for the need of spiritual  itual campaign.  
upliftment, and not merely to  Baba  
show perfection. Perfection when  Yes, you are right. When  
in its highest form includes every  people are starving, you can't  
aspect—sansar perfect, yoga per- preach spirituality. They won't  
fect—perfect attachment, perfect  listen. Come after 15 days. I will  
detachment.  then tell you something—very  
After all this important dis- simple.  
cussion and explanation, Baba  
c  
