The Jeewanmukta* Is Above Law 
BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A., Ph D
   The man in the street has a nebulous and oscillating attitude towards law, because he has not thought about its nature and has not arrived at self-knowledge. There are in him certain selfish and antisocial tendencies as well as a vague perception of the universal goal, and the conflict between these two is usually represented as the conflict between the individual and the law. But the situation is complicated by the fact that the external social law is often created merely by some frozen and blind tradition, or by the mechanical    application of some rigid and ill-fitting abstract principle, or by the chaotic accumulation of complex and unenligh≠tened expectations of the people at large. Sometimes the social law is conducive to the fulfilment of life and sometimes it thwarts the spiritual prog≠ress of the individual. This explains why ordinarily the individual has no clearly defined attitude towards law. At times he respects it and at times he resents it. Sometimes he identifies the social law with right actions and sometimes he looks upon it as a limitation of his own freedom. This dual attitude 
* One experiencing liberation in body. 

 
to law is thus a common feature of the psychology of the 'plain' man. 
   The place and function of law in the life of an ordinary man has to be clearly understood before we can determine its scope. We shall then find that the life and the state of the Jeewanmukta belongs to a totally different order of being, and that it is therefore inappro≠priate to judge his actions and conduct by ordinary standards. The liberated soul is entirely beyond the sphere of law. 
   If we attribute the sanctity of the law to any external source, its authority be≠comes arbitrary and it has a tendency to deprive life of its spontaneity and free≠dom. If life has any intrinsic value of its own, its law will have to be sought for in life itself. The external law of the legislatures or of the conventions and expectations of society can, therefore, have claims upon the individual only in so far as it reflects objectively the inner law of reason. So its significance for the individual is conditional and relative. The same applies to rituals and cere≠monies grounded in  scriptures  or tra≠dition. But the moral law laid down by the inner voice of conscience is believed to have absolute and unconditional claims to the allegiance and obedience of the individual. However, even in the moral sphere, this idea of the moral law applies only to ordinary persons in whom there is division and conflict between the rational and the anti-rational parts of the psyche. Among the philosophers Kant is the best exponent of this way of looking at the moral law, but even he anticipates the possibility of the Holy Will where the anti-rational part is absent and the idea of enforcing a law is on that account inapplicable.
   From the above analysis it becomes clear that the external social law, as well as the internal moral law, can have use and value only to the imperfect indivi≠dual who may at times need the pressure of social opinion or potent beliefs (called principles) for guiding his own life effectively. But a person whose mind is illumined and is eternally dwelling in the full effulgence of the light of Truth can have little use for these aids. He may occasionally prefer to be a 


giver of laws to others for helping them towards the Highest Good, but he himself remains above the domain of law. For him perfect life is spontaneous and unimpeded expression of what he is. He is a law unto himself. He does not act according to external standard. He is one with the Ideal or the Goal and is therefore not responsible to any one except himself.
   If we go deep into the metaphysical implications of the idea of law, we find that it requires a world where there are claims and counter claims, loyalties and duties of individuals in respect of each other, and which therefore presupposes the separate and independent existence of many selves. But the obligation of a law would be absolute only if the separateness of the finite souls is inviolable. However, the man who realizes the Truth, goes beyond the domain of duality and multiplicity, and he therefore completely transcends the scope of application of law. If he is one with all, how can he be permanently bound by any commitments to others or by any expectations which others may have? His action and interaction with other individuals in the world will of course be such as will automatically bring the maximum good to those concerned. But he, in his unique state of consciousness, can hardly be expected to fetter his responses by the expectations and the considerations agitating in the minds of those who are still struggling in Maya. 
   Modern research in physics has shown that even in the material world the so-called determinism can at best be accepted as the probable expectations based on averages. But rigid and uniform determinism does not apply to the ultimate constituents of matter. Their behaviour is incapable of being anticipated with exactness. So in the last analysis, indetermination, rather than rigid determinism, is found to be the characteristic feature of the material world. According to modern science, therefore, spontaneity and freedom, i. e., Lila* is at the heart of reality. And if this applies to the ultimate constituents of matter, it certainly applies to life and particularly to those manifestations of life where it is 
* Spontanity and freedom in action. 

 
becoming conscious of itself. In this light the principle of Lahar* which is so strongly pronounced in many of the saints and men of genius can be seen in its right perspective. If any one can exactly anticipate the actions and the moves of a Master, he will have to be a Master himself. 
   In fact the creativity of Masters is unbounded and their acts are often a surprise to others. This is not to say that the acts of a Master are without any purpose. They have a purpose, but the purpose of their actions is often too deep to be easily grasped by the ordinary minds. As the significance of these actions is often entirely beyond the reach of the imagination of ordinary persons, they are likely to look upon them as whims. But this is a mistake. The Master needs not and often has not time for giving explanation of his moves. Besides he has at his hands a good deal of data and work, the nature of which would not be properly understood by ordinary persons even if he took the trouble to explain it all.
   Moreover what appears as Lahar may often be deliberately used by the Master, both as a test and as a training of the disciple. This technique has won≠derful results in the field of spiritual life, and it might be almost impossible to secure these results of spiritual value in any other way. One of the most difficult tasks with which the Master finds himself faced, is to help the disciples to free their minds from being too much attached to plans about the future. The perfect man has no desires and therefore is living in the Eternal Now. The activity of making plans is, in his case, a part of the outflow of his rich spon≠taneity of action, and is not like the ordinary man due to any desire to fulfil himself through some results in the future. Thus Lord Krishna says: 
"Na me Parthasti kartavyam 
   trishu lokeshu kinchana,
 Nanavaptamavaptavyam 
varta eva cha karmani." 
"O Partha! In all the three worlds there is nothing that I must of necessity do. There is nothing that I have not obtain≠ed; nor is there anything worth ob≠taining for me; and yet I live a life of action." 
   This life of freedom and fullness is utterly different from a life where there is constant 

craving to get satisfaction through results in the future. If in the human plans there is this element of craving, or expectation of satisfaction, the mind is attached to those plans and is bound by them, even if they are plans about good actions. The liberated man is free from good as well as bad sanskaras* and is, therefore, completely unattached to good as well as bad actions. There is no 'must' or 'ought' for him. Whatever he does is an expression of his sweet and unfettered Will or Grace. But ordinary men, and even the aspirants, are burdened by anxious plans about the future. Just as the ego can live upon the thought, "I have done this," it can also live upon the thought, "I shall do this, or I am going to do this." The disciples can be helped in dissolving this form of egoism or being trained by remaining detached from all plans about the future, and only by being required to submit themselves to the Lahar of the Master. Then whatever they do is for the sake of the Master and because he wills it and not because they have in their limited wisdom decided to do so. As soon as the disciple grasps, in his own limited way, the significance of a plan, he has a tendency to get attached to the work     itself, without reference to the Master, and his ego is likely to live upon the thought that he must do it. But if he trains himself to be ready to give up all his undertakings and expectations at the order of the Master, the Lahar, which cannot be predicted, becomes a potent means of keeping the disciple free from many sanskaras and even of actually freeing him from many sanskaras. These considerations may help the readers to see in their right perspective, many of the moves and actions of Shri Meher Baba, which on the first view might seem incomprehensible and baf≠fling. His actions do not spring from any compulsions, inner or outer; they are the expressions of his Grace which is beyond the sphere of law. 

* Impressions of all actions or thoughts, good or bad, on the mind. 