Shri Meher Baba's Tour 

OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA* 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 

It is late at night when we approach Navasari, and unusually cold. Baba re≠calls on His board all the names of the different members of the D. family as if He were gathering them ahead, in His unfathomable way, before entering the outer details of their lives and personal problems. These names I have in≠scribed in my heart with the sincere wits to keep alive forever the charm of their spiritual friendship. The four brothers, S., J., B., and A., and the women related to them; also the younger generation numbering many sons and daughters of the three brothers of Sorabji Desai. 

Sorabji Desai is the author of an hundred volumes on a variety of subjectsósocial, religiousóand also on well-experienced spiritual philo≠sophy. His last book is called "My Celestial Rambles" in which he ex≠plains the purpose and lives of the great Masters with whom he has been per≠sonally acquainted. 

Usually at any Indian station where Baba has once passed it is like fire. The news spreads in a spectacular way with leaps and bounds, from street to street, from home to home. He is cheered like a king and hailed with cries of " Shri Sadguru Meher Baba Maharaj Ki JaióHail the Perfect Master Shri Meher Baba" resounds in swinging waves along the streets and squares. This time His arrival is kept unofficial and private. He is received at the station of Navasari by the intimate members of the family without ceremony; a quick embrace and His car disappears into the night. 

A real feast of Love was waiting for Him in the dear old home where He had visited several times before. The numerous members of the family are standing in line, with solemn mood, taking 

Baba's Darshana. Baba, in His divine easy flowing manner, suddenly breaks the conventional rigidity and puts everyone at ease making them smile and express their true hearts filled with joy over the arrival of their great Guest. After a few moments Baba expresses the desire to visit 'His' dear old man and tells us to follow. We pass through a huge library, filled with a long line of pictures hanging in uneven rows, and the many bookshelves throwing dark shadows and filling the white-washed walls almost to the ceiling. We enter the dimly lighted sickroom. Baba stands before the dying man who offers no resistance, his soul extended into Him ready to obey the call. There stands God exchanging in joy and bliss the trial of life of a man who conscious of his fulfilling state in new realization of life as Truth, recognized the Friend standing before him to act as Truth, as I Divine. Baba, without solemn attitude, after a few moments, as if He had dropped a 'veil' over the failing life, makes a sign for all to leave. 

Supper is prepared in a vast passage-space, a sort of open air dining room, situated between the main building and the kitchen house. A long table covered with green leaves, heavy laden with fresh fruits, nuts, sweetmeats and tea is ready to restore us. Baba presides at the table. The Divine psychological Juggler at once changed the rhythm in mood of everyone present. A whimsical glance, very difficult to decipher, brings to the surface some humorous intimation. With Baba life is never sad. Baba does not want us to mourn over passing things, He helps us to hold free within the Vision of the Merry State in Being, that lightness in spirit which makes one feel detached from the uncertainties of life. We then realize that death is Truth function. We know that the 'trespassing show' in its fluid motion is the fulfilling order of the Divine Will that is Love. 

Baba clapping His hands gives the signal for all to retire. He spells on the board: "Now all go to bed and do not worry." He embraces us one by one, and, laying His hand on the head of each brings in stillness and deep understanding. We are shown to a small 

joint cottage, on the same estate, which has been specially prepared for Baba and His party.

 The next morning at 5-30 Baba gives the unmistakable signal for all to rise. At 7-30 all the members of the family are to assemble in the library. The first news is that Sorabji had a restful night. Baba pays a visit to Sorabji entering the room alone and remains inside for a few moments. When coming out He gives definite orders that no visitors should enter the sick room except those who are as≠signed to take care of the patient. Furthermore, He gives dispositions that the wedding feast for the three hundred guests should be called off, and only a few near relatives and friends should be invited to the marriage ceremony of the 27th of December. That date remains unchanged. Baba's further dispositions are to exclude the crowds for Dar≠shana, that same day, as He wants to see only those few who, later in the evening, are asked to call and com≠mune in silence with him. To us he expresses the same order and states: "I do not want to meet the masses here now, they will come when I speakó then no more will anyone resist." 

Towards noon, Sorabji Desai who apparently feels stronger, sends a mes≠sage to Baba through his younger bro≠ther expressing the special wish for us of the party to see his 'Holy Sanctuary. ' Sorabji who always was a worshipper of Truth had collected, during many years, relics and personal documents of saints and great spiritual souls regard≠less of their differences of creed or religion, creating evidence of their holy lives through the testimony of inspiring documents. The most valuable in the collection is a letter from Baba, written in His own handwriting in the form of a poem dedicated to His Holy Mother of revered memory, Hazrat Baba Jan. Sorabji's brother who, during his illness, has become the guardian of the holy shrine, shows us also a locket containing the snow white hair of the Holy Woman. Her hair appears brisk and strong as if still alive with the spark of Her Divine Life. He showed us a tiny bit of cloth which belonged to St. Therese D'Avila. This recalls a few 





 

moments spent in Spain when, with Baba, we were visiting the City of Avila where St. Therese had lived and performed her remarkable life. Stand≠ing in the Cathedral Baba said: "The Saints are like the nerves of my body; they work for me and I guide their lives." 

It is a remarkable fact that lives lived in purity of Being create Truth facts, and these permeating as atmosphere of benediction, throughout age and time, are felt by any pure human heart. 

A very interesting book, entitled "Hundred and One Names of God", Volume V, is put before us. Most of the explanations on the subject of universal order were directly given by Baba. The day that the last proof of the book was submitted to Baba for verification, a very interesting phenomenon hap≠pened: Baba was holding the Book pointing on the chart to the Highest Point in Divine ExistenceóGodó when a huge light in the form of an arrow shoots forth from His head and transforming into a luminous spiral, fills the room with golden glow which to all present be-comes evident and is  felt as 'Divine 

Light' that transgressing all form is Oneness. Before leaving the room we turn towards Sorabji to express our gratitude for the inspiration we had obtained; he responds with a smile and salutes us as friends. We feel after these few moments of communion with saintly memories that the spiritual bond which already has been established is strengthened. 

Later in the day a visitor finds her way to our private bungalow. She is an Eastern lady, elegant in appearance with manners of the world. Visible lines of suffering mark her beautiful and noble face. The purpose of her coming is clearly determined by re≠served attitude. She comes to call on the God-man. Although her visit is expected, nevertheless her name is carefully reported and she is asked to wait in patience to be received. Baba wants the aspirant to be calm before meeting Him. He needs the human apparatus, which He works through, to be in tranquil state of mind in control of nerves and emotion. Mrs. X. is one of the most outstanding personalities in the City of Navsari. Her husband occu≠pies a responsible position and 



holds the confidence of a large com≠munity. Her life is martyrdom. In no other way can the heroic struggle be defined that for years she has kept concealed within her lonesome heart in order to avoid outer conflicts and un≠worthy situations which could shock the perfect confidence given to her husband and herself by the community of Navsari. The facts which strengthen her pure determination to bear this life in struggle, are clear. Her husband cannot agree with her free interpre≠tation of religion. To her religion is practice of Truth in life; it is real expe≠rience, in purer conscience, indepen≠dent from rituals and ceremonies. She married for a noble objectiveóto redeem the life of her husband. She felt endowed with the spiritual right to free him from unworthy bondage in mind, unworthy entanglements and influences of lower order that throughout all his life, even before his marriage, had obstructed his spiritual advancement. She had taken up the conscious struggle from the day she met him. Their married life was an unceasing ordeal, for he could not readily understand; nevertheless she carried out her duty as a true companion and wife of the High Official in an immaculate way. Within her lonesome life, longing for the reali≠zation of Truth, she marches on under the protection of the 'Gods' which in her revealed as the Voice. Harmonies of pure spiritual ecstasy compensated for the tortures in her mind. Souls person≠ifying Krishna Bhagwan, Mohomed and other Supreme Beings many times appeared to her; nevertheless she felt the need for the alive Human God. When she first met Shri Meher Baba she realized that He was the Perfect One whom she had expected for so long; that He would give new strength to her inner life to fulfil the Divine Theme; that He would give her courage to bear the external strife; that he would enlighten her and give her the under≠standing that this phase of her life is making good and is unfolding toward the Pure End, and that she will be able to carry out her noble duties aloof, quiet in mind. We see her walk out of Baba's room after an unusually long meeting. Passing by 





  

where we are all standing, she remarks with unusual poise, "I shall be again here in the evening." 

It is four o'clock in the afternoon. The music of a complete Indian orches≠tra begins to swing in harmonious notes and subtle thrills tuning in with the worship of the few who have come to commune with Baba. Baba is seated on a low couch especially arranged for Him on a rug, leaving space for those who want to sit nearer and feel His influenceóBaba's influence that is Peace, making Peace in all. While Baba is surrounded by loving devotees, a message is sent by Sorabji, through his brother J., requesting Baba to grant his last wish to take Darshana from Baba. Baba allows that he should be brought, although it meant for the sick man to make a super-human physical effort, as his condition is showing symptoms of life extinction. When he stands before Baba, he frees himself from the outer help given by his brother, and drops to Baba's feet. The dying man is per≠forming the last surrender in external rites with the increasing impulse of his longing soul that knows to be near the end that is a new Beginning. Suddenly Baba, with imperative gesture, gives order that he should be taken back to bed, still holding in suspense his life with His Divine will. 

The music stops just before six o'clock and is to commence again at eight. Mrs. X. arrives. She comes like a holy priestess with her women, her friends, who represent the community of her own 'Living Church within ' and whom, for many years, she had inspired and led on to the Path. She brought them to Baba that they may, from now on, realize Truth through Him who is the Personification of Truth. Before her Living Lord she performs the holy sacrifice of pure self-dedication using the ancient ritual of worship, the waving of the arti. She passes the flaming vessel before all present that in it may be burned the old life, and resurrect in Being. She prostrated her≠self before the alive Idol surrendering her whole life, that life which had to be realized beyond ecstasy, beyond emotion, deep within the sum of all life óher Soul. She was con≠


scions that her life was taking a new turn at the feet of the Beloved, our Baba, who in no way accepts sacrifice without return of His love imper≠ishable, without arousing the impetus of life divine in the one who shows the conscious courage to want to grow. 

When she put on Baba the white garment embroidered with silver and pearls which she and her friends had worked in sincere devotion, she spoke with loud voice audible to every one present: "Beloved Lord of our age may Thou descend on earth like Lord Krishna and bring salvation to man≠kind." 

We have witnessed Baba arouse the slumbering affection in the human heart. We have seen Him enlighten within the eternal flame of the Soul. We see Him here draw back to the Divine Source of all existence a living soul and we witness the offering of that living soul to the alive God. 

The next morning we hear that Sorabji has not rested. Baba goes to cheer him and sees him for the last time. New dispositions are given; two things are to be observed as strict order, no outsider should approach Sorabji from now on, and the directions of the doctor to be strictly followed. The date of the marriage ceremony has not been changed. 

The train to Bombay leaves at 7 a. m. but Baba gives order that we should be at the station half an hour earlier. The farewell is sweet and not sad, although every one feels in apprehension the event of Sorabji 's approaching depar≠ture. One of the younger members of the family, who had become my special friend, made a wish before we left and begged me to take it deep into my heart; she said, "Tell Baba to call me soon." I answer, "For good?" She nods, "Yes, for good." 

Many curious people stand on the station platform and stare at Baba, unconsciously taking the benefit of His atmosphere. One of the brothers said, "One does not speak to Baba, it is not necessary. One realizes through the spiritual atmosphere that expands from His Pure Being all that is good." 

The train leaves. We all sit still for a while, then Baba begins to play jokes and tricks and brings everyone back to 



 

the reality of a new day. At a station  structions from Baba and return to  

called Gholvad one of our party, R. is  Bombay later in the evening. We arrive  

given an order to leave. He is to visit a  at 11 a.m. in Bombay, the 25th of '  

family of lepers and deliver special in- December, and return to K. s home on  

Frere Road.  