dur hai has been a saying in India for the last five hundred years. Its literal meaning is "Delhi is far," but the phrase came to have an import of Fate behind it after being originally uttered by one whom time has called a Saint. This holy man lived in Delhi centuries ago, and had fallen into disfavour with the King— perhaps for his capacity of speaking the truth and his predictions which made him feared by this Ruler. In any case, once when the King was away on conquests, which brought him a series of successes even as far away as Bengal, he did not like to hear the reports of the Saint's growing influence at home; so he sent word that he should leave Delhi before the royal return. In reply to the victorious King, who was even then on the march back to his capital, the Saint sent the above cryptic reply. As chance would have it, the proud 
• 
King just before his arrival at the gates of Delhi, himself desired to celebrate his renowned victories, and staged a great pageantry on the plains surrounding the capital which had been the scene of many an ancient victory and defeat. Among the other things arranged, was an elephant fight between the King's own battling herds, and, during the terrific struggle that ensued which delighted the Ruler very much, one of the battling elephants became enraged, and dashing out of all con­troI, charged the very place where the King was reviewing the fight, and instantly killed the Monarch. Thus the words of the Saint, Delhi dur hai, took on dramatic significance. 
This picturesque anecdote is told, because it tends somewhat to illustrate the constant play of good and evil forces that have been the background of 
* Continued from June 1939 issue 

Delhi, which was our next place of stay on the spiritual journey through India with a modern Sadguru, 
From the 12th century until the advent of the present new Imperial capital, there have been seven dynasties. The past history of Delhi has not alone included rulers with their conquests, but interwoven with this material carnage of battles, is the gentle tradition of saints. Why, we may ask, should these evolved souls be found amongst such material surroundings? Or could we not elicit more enlightenment to the question, if rather we asked, why should we not find saints where there is great spiritual need? That a lineage of saints did have their abodes around this ancient capital of still more ancient country, we can find precedent in our Christian scriptures where it states, that there was a long line of prophets around Jerusalem for centuries, and Palestine was no more spiritual a land in those days than India. 
Outside of Delhi today, about fifteen miles distant, there stands one of the most perfect architectural columns with five storeys, which towers gracefully towards the 
heavens and is called Kutub Minar. Going to this monument one day in early February 1939 with Shri Baba, the party of disciples passed near by the old city of Delhi, built on the site of the most remote capital that dated back to the 1st century, and which, in comparison, would have been the time of the early Christians following the Resurrection. Feeling the atmosphere of the past as we gazed at the almost ethereal beauty of the Kutub Minar, Shri Baba linked the column with present existence, by remarking that the Kutub Minar has importance today not only in the material world but in the subtle world. 
A few miles away on our return ride to Delhi by the bus which had been our faithful conveyance throughout the journey, Baba directed that we stop at the shrine of Nizam-ud-Din, a 14th century saint who is much revered even today by countless pilgrims. First we were shown the saint's last earthly resting place which had been also the site of his abode. An incident related by the guardian of the shrine, which gave reality 

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
to the dead in the imagination of Baba’s disciples, was when he pointed out a nearby grave which was simply covered over by grass. It is said that nothing but fresh grass is ever put on this small plot, as it was the express wish of Jehanara, the daughter of Shah Jehan, the great Moghul Emperor and builder of the Taj Mahal. She left court life and became a disciple of the saint, Nizam-ud-Din. It was her desire, having renounced everything in the world for the life of the spirit, that no commemoration be placed over her grave, not even flowers. While· the earthly distinctions to which she was born meant nothing to her, it might well have pleased her to have her last resting place in the close proximity of the great saint who had been her spiritual Master. 
Before coming to Delhi, Shri Baba had remarked to his disciples that they might see a living saint there, who was one of his spiritual agents. As the shrine of Nizam-ud-Din was known to be the tomb of a past saint, this was the place least expected by us that we could anticipate the privilege of seeing an alive saint. But journeying with the Master, surprises were the order of the day. We were led by Baba to an out-of-the-way, cell-like chamber within the large en­closure, where dwells, in the shadow of the shrine, a patriarchal holy man with grey beard and extraordinarily luminous eyes. Only a shaft of light entered through the doorway where we stood with the Master, but fortunately for us, it fell directly upon the noble features of one who resembled our ideal of the prophets of old. We witnessed the expression of deep inner recognition as this Saint beheld the Master. We knew that the normal human eye with its limited sight has the capacity of seeing only the material body; but what of the inner sight of the subtle eye, and of the vision of the spirit, both of which are said to be possessed by saints? What light effulgent must they behold in a Master! The Master himself has stated that only a Master can truly recognize a Master, but indeed what this saint perceived at that moment in Baba was a spiritual experience which we felt with reverence. We, too, in our less developed way, could join in concord with the saint, as we so deeply knew in our hearts concerning Baba, in the words of the simple faith of Mary Magdelene about Christ, "He is one, not as other men are." Baba, upon leaving the holy dweller of the shrine, told us that he is the spiritual guardian of this district, and at that very moment he had received a spiritual promotion through contact with a Master. We might well attach added significance to the fact that it should happen at this period of outer world stress and strain, previously to the coming spiritual awakening which is now being stirred by the Master. This coming, in contact with the evolved souls and saints through­out the journey, is surely one of the means to spiritual outcome. 

It was at Delhi that a special trend of Baba's spiritual work during the tour became visible, which was his personal contact and work with masts. Masts are those seekers of God who become dazed upon the Path, where­by their minds have become unbal­anced, although they are spiritually advanced souls. In India they are known as the "God-intoxicated". I have not heard this latter term used in the West, except concerning some of the early Quakers who became so ecstatic in their devotion and worship of God that they were said to be "intoxicated by the spirit". However, this was generally of short duration and not a permanent condition. Except for a few of the mystics in the West, I do not think that this type is to be found there, because the coun­tries are too young, and it is not yet that men go mad there, for love of God. The only hope of cure for the masts is "spiritual cure", and this can only be done by a Perfect Master who has himself arrived at the Goal and can point the way to others; lesser guides may themselves lose the way to Perfection. A Perfect Master can judge whether it is individually best for a spiritually dazed soul to be gradually brought back to a state of normality on the physical plane, or given a spiritual push on the inner planes, and it is he alone that can perform this spiritual service. If such a soul longing for God, seeking so 

profoundly, had come originally in contact with a Sadguru (Perfect Guide), he would have led them safely through the "pitfalls" of the spiritual Path about which every saint who has written has warned the true seekers of God. Our Western names for some of the spiritual pitfalls are Pride, Greed and Lust. So, therefore, are we not all in need of a Perfect Guide? 
One day, while the disciples were on a ride with Shri Baba through the main parts of the capital, we came to an especially crowded section near the great Mosque which is in about the centre of the city. Baba motioned that the bus should be driven close to the wide steps that lead up to this sanctuary. There, amongst the poor, the lame, the halt and the blind who habituated this place in hopes of material or spiritual benefit, the Master singled out one soul whom we saw at quite a distance away seated in ragged garment. Immedi­ately afterwards Baba declared that the ride was at an end, so we all returned to the place where we were residing in Delhi. There Baba directed two of his mandali (close men disciples) who had not been on the ride, to go and bring this mast from the Mosque. When they arrived at the steps of the Mosque, they found it most difficult from the description to pick out the right man, as all seemed to answer to the outer description of ragged garment, dark hair, beard, etc. But, as they were not on the first mission of this kind, for Baba has had some of his mandali searching out masts in the past two years which were brought to him at the "Ashram for God-mad” at Rahuri and later at Meherabad, so they knew that the Master would enable them to have the right intuition in the matter. Watching all these derelicts of humanity intently, they finally narrowed down the selection to two men, one of whom outwardly. had a spiritual looking face, and they believed this man to be the one, until they asked him a question to which he replied by a tale of having lost his money and position—which sounded all too rational! So turning to the other man whose only distinguishing feature was that he was 

inconspicuous, they asked him questions, and his only response to everything was the name of God. Bringing this dazed soul to Baba, when he approached the Master, he became like one intoxicated, and his legs failed him; so he had to be supported. The Master gave him bath which carried with it a benediction, as he usually employs the medium of water for the outward "cure", while his personal touch is the medium for spiritual cure. Afterwards the man recognized the Master, and declared that that day he had seen the vision of the God whom he had been ceaselessly naming. Baba sent him out again into life, but those who have had long experience with the Master know the spiritual process. Many of these souls automatically, as if through coincidence, are brought again into his contact at a. future time, and the "change" is clearly written on their whole being. The Master has bestowed upon them the divine impulse, and life itself has been the school. They become useful mediums for the spreading of the spirit in realms of which his close disciples 
even cannot function. 
After leaving Delhi, the Master's party went to Ajmer (Rajputana) via Alwar and Jaipur States. The country we motored through was interesting, and one became again aware of the variety and spaciousness of the land which is India. To a large extent the independent States have retained their own character and distinctiveness; one might call them the most picturesque, for they have less of British influence and are not necessarily as much advanced from the modern point of view. 
Jaipur is called the "Pink City", as the rocks on which it is situated and the buildings are all of varying shades of pink. Ambar is the ancient city one passes a few miles before coming to the present capital called Jaipur City. Baba remarked that Ambar was the abode of a few evolved souls in the past, and even today there is one who had his abode there. Rising high above the ancient capital is a great feudal castle that is one of the largest and most picturesque in India. It resembles a fairy-tale version of a city. Just as we were motoring by, 

at the base we saw a crowd and heard martial music, then noticed marching up the steep hill to the upper city the type of troops associated with "toy soldiers", as they were wearing red trousers, blue coats and large black helmets, and were "goose stepping" very stiffly. When the bus was stopped by traffic, we asked what the celebration was, and the police officer replied that the Maharajah was going to worship, and he was being escorted by soldiers. This police officer seemed unusually interested that our party should see well the spectacle, and pointed to a place where there was a deserted terrace, and Baba ordered that we all get out of the bus, apparently to see the sight. One pedestrian passed Baba on the road at that moment, whom we did not remember until afterward, as the disciples' attention was principally focussed then on the "taxi stand" down below where there were stand­ing elephants in regal attire for riding, alongside the motor conveyances. As we watched all this "passing show" of maya, we felt Baba abstracted. After a few moments he remarked on his board, "I wanted to stop here," and looking at the Master we followed his gaze up to the hill on the opposite side of the procession. There, outlined against the sky in the clear atmosphere of mountains, was a sunburnt, weather­beaten man with white hair and beard, wearing only a loin cloth and with a staff in his hand, who was ascending the path. This ragged man had the far gaze that one finds characteristic of both "children of nature" and of mystics. All of a sudden we realized that this man was the same pedestrian who had passed at the very moment that Baba had descended from the bus, and the coincidence naturally struck us, although at the time we had been too engrossed elsewhere to give any attention to this passer-by. Baba, however, who is aware of every passing soul and even foreknew this meeting, I felt certain, as I recalled his telling before we came to Amber, to stop a moment on the other side of the old capital. Until that particular point there had been no opportunity of stopping, due to the unusual circumstances 

HEART OF THE WORLD 
of crowds and police line. Later Baba a real lover of God, and does there the informed us that this was the one truly Master’s spiritual work. spiritual man of this district, that he is 
