 
ONCE, Ghausali Shah Qalander whilst discoursing on the state of spiritual Perfection (Faqiri) said, "Perfection is a matter of a fraction of a second. A word in the ear is sufficient to lift a man instantaneously from finiteness to infinity. Such a transformation is not dependent on the performance of prayers or the observance of fasts. Moulana Rumi has said: "Divine Grace is not limited by 
conditions of ability. In fact ability in one is condi­
tioned by Divine Grace". 
Hearing this one of the dis­ciples remarked, "Sire, if Reali­zation be so easy of attainment, then why is it that disciples are invariably made to undergo a long period of trials and austerities? In reply to this query, the Master related the following anecdote: 
A man had in his possession two vessels encrusted with age-long rust and dirt. He wanted to have them cleansed. He gave one vessel to a professional who promised to cleanse it in forty days and the other to another man who undertook to do the job in one day. The first jobber began to work at it scientifically and by subjecting the vessel to different processes of scraping, burning and by the application of chemicals over a period of forty days, made a perfect job of it and made the vessel not only spick and span new, but serviceable. 
The second man who promised to finish the job in one day, adopted a very drastic procedure by burning the vessel in a huge fire around it. This resulted in cleansing the vessel quickly and completely but this treatment made the vessel worthless and brittle, liable to break at the least knock or disturbance. It can be seen that both the vessels from the standpoint of purity and renovation resulting from different methods of treatment were perfect, but from the view­point of utility, one was serviceable and the other useless. 
It is for this reason that Perfect Masters usually never give Realization to an aspirant instan­taneously but they lead him to the desired result over a long period and process of trials and tribulations which enable him to withstand the acquisition thereof. 

In this connection Meher Baba once remarked to his disciples that, "Realization of God can be imparted to anyone in a second, but it will be for one's own self with no benefit resulting therefrom to others. The period of austerities, self-denial and hard­ships that you are experiencing with me, will empower and autho­rise you to use Realization when achieved, for the spiritual uplift of others." 

