FORGETFULNESS is not renun­ciation. It simulates renunciation only in its lower aspects. Forget­fulness is purely a psychic phenomenon, which gradually develops into spiritual experience. Renunciation includes both the factors connected therewith, viz., physical and mental. It is only when renunciation becomes mental that it assumes the quality and dignity of forgetfulness. 
One may renounce the world but one may not necessarily forget it. One may give up the allurements of heaven and deny the horrors of hell, but the inborn hope and fear associated therewith cannot alto­gether be forgotten. According to a Sufi poet, the secret of happiness is in forgetfulness and paradise is 
merely a symbolic expression thereof. He says— ''What is after all paradise which is 
so largely advertised by the Church? 
It is one of the beautiful boquets adorning the mantlepiece of my mental state—forgetfulness. Forgetfulness may be an 
unscientific term but it explains the science and secret behind all happiness and pleasure, spiritual or otherwise, which human beings experience or enjoy. The Sufis term forgetfulness as Bikhudi which has a spiritual significance and it should not be mixed up with unconsciousness (Bihushi), which is a physical phenomenon . 
The psychological difference 

between these two states of mind is very sharp and well defined. Forgetfulness is the detachment of the mind from the physical world and unconsciousness is the dead­ening of the mind towards things material. The former gives rise to a feeling of spiritual ecstacy and happiness while the latter results in mere cessation of pain. 
Physiologically also, it is an admitted fact that in a perfectly healthy condition of the body one is not aware of the existence of the vital organs like the brain, the heart, the lungs, the liver or the kidneys. That means one forgets that these organs are functioning ceaselessly in the human anatomy, resulting in a feeling of well-being and health. No sooner any of these organs assert themselves and remind the possessor thereof of their presence and function in the system, it means an unhealthy and diseased state of that organ, which is a condition of pain. The more the mind stuff is directed to or monopolised by a particular organ or part of the body, the more is the pain felt and when it reaches its climax, unconsciousness inter­venes—a saving break in the thread of consciousness which affords temporary relief by enabling one to forget the pain. 
Sleep likewise is the state of unconsciousness which affords a temporary respite and recovery from the wear and tear of life experienced by day. It has been argued that 'life is evil because pain is its basic stimulus and reality and an escape from this predicament is afforded by nature in death for the species and sleep for the individual'. 
The whole philosophy of happiness therefore hinges round the question of memory and memory is nothing but an attachment of the mind to a particular idea, person or place. Forgetfulness is memory inverted. Genius suffers most because he knows and remembers too much. It has been said, "He that increaseth knowledge, increaseth sorrow. Memory and foresight add to human misery; for most of our suffering lies in retrospect or anticipation; pain itself is brief. How much more suffering is caused by the thought of death than by death itself?" 
Memory therefore is pain, which can be overcome in two ways—the negative and the positive. The positive method is that of forgetfulness in which the mind remains active but refuses to react to external stimuli. The negative method is either to become unconscious, i.e., to stop the mind altogether as in sound sleep or to work the mind too fast as in madness which has been defined as a way to avoid the memory of suffering; or to work it too slowly by external means such as intoxicants or dope of some kind. 

It can thus be seen that the steady cultivation of forgetfulness develops in man that poise and balance of mind, which automati­cally enables him to express in life the noble qualities, like charity, forgiveness, tolerance, selflessness and service. One who is not so equipped with the attitude of forgetfulness, becomes a living barometer of his circumstances and surroundings. Any the slightest whisper of praise, flattery, slander or criticism disturbs his equipoise and his mind at once becomes a sea of emotions either elevating or depressing. Such a man is perpetually at war with himself and the world and knows no peace. 
In the exercise of forgetfulness, not only non-reaction to adverse circumstances is essential but even favourable and pleasurable impres­sions ought not to be cognised. It is this poise or detachment of mind that is evidently referred to in the famous lines of the poet who sang: 
"It is easy enough to smile, When everything goes by with 
a song. But the man worthwhile Is the man who can smile When everything goes dead 
wrong?" 
Although forgetfulness is at the root of all happiness, yet it is so difficult of acquisition. Once attained, a man with this state of the mind can rise above all pain and pleasure and remain unper­turbed and unaffected by his surroundings and circumstances. Nature infrequently has endowed some human beings with this enviable trait of forgetfulness and it is such people that have given to the world the best we know of in poetry, art, philosophy or science. 
A poet can in such moments of utter forgetfulness or mental 

detachment from his material surroundings, allow his mind and imagination to soar into ethereal regions and the resultant poetry is nothing but crystallised inspiration. An artist when he completely loses himself in the ideal, which when it takes form, is at once acclaimed as the masterpiece of art and beauty. The best of philosophy is uttered when a person surveys the past, studies the present and probes into the future from a detached angle of vision and allows no room in his mind for the interplay of his emotions and feelings; circum­stances and surroundings. Some of the greatest of scientific discov­eries have been vouchsafed to humanity, when least expected or thought upon. But such mani­festations of forgetfulness known as genius are rare and far between and it is in this sense it is said that poets, artists or philosophers are born and not made. 
The best that worldly people sometimes attempt in this direction, results in developing the state of mind known as stoicism and epicureanism—the former is the apathetic acceptance of defeat and the latter is the effort to forget defeat in the arms of pleasure. This is not true forgetfulness. When a man seriously undertakes to acquire the state of forgetfulness, he may be said to have entered the spiritual life. 
And here one has to pass through different degrees and stages of forgetfulness until the goal is reached. According to Meher Baba, "Forgetfulness of the world makes one a Yogi; forgetfulness of the next world (heaven and hell) makes one a saint; forgetfulness of God means Realization and forgetfulness of forgetfulness is Perfection." 
