BY  JAL  R. IRANI,  B.A
.

 
YES, we  all  have  heard  about the Woolworth store where you get everything; from a pin to a locomotive. But it's time the  whole

world	also	knew	about	the
Superman store.
Right	this	way	ladies	and
gentlemen, and please don't get me wrong, for I am neither a salesman from the Superman store nor am I standing on an auctioneer's platform. This way folk .  .  .  .  .  Not  a penny . . . . . Just ask for anything, it's all gratis. People have already come from all the corners of the world and have asked for pet monkeys, field-rats, baby camels and elephants, cars, houses, friends and even a companion for life. We are also expecting, very shortly, somebody who would come asking for a "Queen Mary" or a ìNormandieî. We have these in stock too, but there is only one condition. There, there, there. . . . . Donít get so jumpy! There is no hitch. The only condition is that you have got to come to this Superman store in person. Is it really asking too much, ladies and  gentlemen? All that you have to do, in case you
 
want a "Queen Mary", is to spend a little towards passage-money from your native town to this Superman store. But you have got to come in person; besides imagine the posting charges and wrappers for a "Queen Mary!"
In the Woolworth store you get everything at its finest. A fine pin and a shiny streamlined loco. But I am sure you do not get a rusty nail or a locomotive that runs on sand . In the Woolworth store you get things which you expect but in this Superman store you get both, the things you expect and the things you do not expect. You can ask for a rusty nail and you can ask for the most uncomfortable transportation bullock-cart. . . . . . . . .
You'll get them.
There have been people who had come asking for a trip around the world. Of course they got it, but the funny part about it is that, after the trip, instead of going to their native lands they have stayed behind to work in the Superman store. This store sort of gets you. You come asking for a luxury liner and you are shown something still better. In fact
 

 
something so much better that you consider your former choice in the light of sheer insignificant silliness. And the guarantee of the Superman store is .... you ask for  anything, you are shown that thing and you are shown something, much better, the choice is entirely at your discretion. As yet not one person has taken what he came asking for. He took that something better for which the Superman store is the sole distributor and the sole agent.
The Superman store has remedies for poor and rich alike. It is given in one single dose .and things begin to happen. You change! Not from rich to poor and vice-versa, but you change within yourself. You change so much that you feel the cheery warmth of a fire while you are actually sitting in a pool of filth with a 'cat and dog rain' on top of it. If you are rich, but not rich enough to buy an air-ship, you are welcome to the Superman store. You will get a ride in a bullock-cart. You expected fun out of the ride in the air-ship and you got fun. Nothing so wonderful about it! But the management of the Superman store will give you such
 
a swell ride in the bullock-cart that you'll forget all about the air-ship and go nuts about the bulls. This you did not expect and you got it, and you will like it.
The Superman store replaces broken lovers' hearts and has a novel method of convincing the money-makers that 'You can't take it with you.' It provides a heaven for the lost and drifting souls, a Home Sweet Home for true lovers, a palace for those who have taken leave of their senses, a zoo for the lovers of pets and wild animals, and even a God for those who really want Him and not only out of intellectual curiosity.
Such is the Superman store and you are all cordially invited. Come if you want to see the most glorious ideal, come if you wish to realize God, and come if you wish to learn the true meaning of Love.
Lovers of peace will get peace and lovers of war will get war plus ruin, chaos and destruction.
The Superman store has love and jealousy, happiness and misery. Whatever you desire you have got to come and take it away in person.
 