The karma yogin avoids the chaotic activity of selfish desires as well as the apparent inaction of utter non-wanting; but he leads a life of selfless service in which there is 
not the slightest alloy of any 
personal motive and which furthers the release of Divinity in all the phases of life. 
It is very important that service, even when it is utterly selfless, must be guided by spiritual under­standing: for selfless service when unintelligently handled 
often creates chaos and compli­
cations. Many good persons are 
ceaselessly active for public cause 
through social institutions. But 
what does that activity lead to? For one problem which it solves it often creates ten other problems owing to the unforeseen and uncontrollable side-results of such activity. Worldly men try to coun­teract evil through opposi-


tion; but in doing so they often unconsciously become authors of some other evils. Suppose, a group of ants has climbed on the body of a certain individual, and one of them bites him. He might instinctively want to punish it by killing it. But if he were to strike it with his hands, he might, in doing so, kill many other ants which were in no way involved in biting. So, in trying to secure justice against one ant, he is inevitably drawn into an activity which means injustice to so many other ants. The man who is drawn into the vortex of public life through a generous impulse, without having mastered the art of pure service, finds himself in a similar situation. He may be selfless: but his actions create chaos instead of harmony, because he has not learnt how to render real and effective service without creating complications. So, if action is to be a pure blessing for the universe, it must be born of consummate understanding of life. 
Those who come into contact with me should develop true understanding of life and cultivate that type of service which creates no complications. 
When service is rendered in a selfless spirit, it always benefits the karmayogin although he himself does not do it for the sake of any reward or result. There is no doubt 
that even when he renders selfless 

SELFLESS SER­VICE MUST BE service unintelligently, he derives BASED UPON UN-some spiritual benefit thereby; but DERSTANDING in doing so he cannot avoid causing much unnecessary suffering to others. However, when he renders selfless service 

with spiritual understanding, it not only confers spiritual benefit upon himself, but also promotes the material and the spiritual well-being of others involved in it. 'That is why selfless service must be based upon understanding, if it is to be an unmixed boon for all concerned. 
That which is looked upon as service by ordinary persons might, under special circumstances, be con­sidered as disservice by the Master; 
APPARENT SER-
for he has an unerring knowledge of 
VICE MAY SOME-
the situation and a deeper grasp of 
TIMES REALLY 
its spiritual demands. Thus, though 
BE DISSERVICE 
it is normally an undeniable piece of service to give food to those who are needy, there may be some qualifying circumstances which, in a particular situation, require that the person who comes for food should not be given food for his own good. The tendency to beg for food as charity creates undesirable sanskaras, and in feeding a person who comes to you with this tendency you may help him to increase the burden of such sanskaras, So, though you may appear to do him good by offering food, you may in reality be successful only in binding him further. And, though it may not have been your motive to crush him under your obligations, you may in actuality be doing nothing else, when you are charitable not through understanding but through habit. 
What applies to the above instance of giving food also applies to the dispensation of many 
other things—tangible and intangible; and though from the narrower point of view a thing may definitely seem to be nothing but service for the recipient, it may, from the higher point of view, be a definite piece of disservice to him. Just as what is nourishing to a healthy man may be poison to a patient, what is generally good for people may be an evil for some particular person. So, intelligent charity requires profound understanding of the spiritual needs of the situation. 
But all this should only make people more careful and discriminating in their service. It need not discourage them in the spirit of selfless service. It is 
true that only a Master can be 
unerring in guaging the spiritual 
demands of any situation. But it 
would be a pity if those who can­
not be so sure about their 
judgment withold their spontan­eous urge for selfless service, lest in obeying it they might unwittingly be actually rendering disservice. It had been already made clear that even when a person renders selfless service unintelligently, he always derives spiritual benefit through it. 
In fact, from the spiritual point of view, the real danger in service lies more in the possibility of your rendering it from a false motive than in the possibility of your making a mistake about spiritual demands of the situation. If you render service in order to oblige a person and if you 


feel proud for doing it you are not only doing spiritual harm to the recipient of your service but 
SERVICE SHOULD 
also to yourself. If while serving 
BE RENDERED 
you take delight in it and 
WITH UTTER 
develop the pride that you are 
DETACHMENT 
doing a good thing, you are getting attached to your act and thereby binding yourself. Just as a man may get bound by an iron chain or by a golden chain, so also a person can get spiritually bound by his attachment to evil deeds or by his attachment to good deeds. Hence the way to remain free from karma is to remain completely detached in service. The consciousness, "I am obliging some one," is the first to occur during the process of serving; but it can be annulled by the contrary thought, "I am myself being obliged by being given this opportunity of serving." This latter thought facilitates the attitude of detachment and secures freedom from the bondage of good actions. So, service which is based upon compre­hensive understanding is not only selfless and adjusted to the spiritual demands of the recipient, but is ren­dered with complete detachment; and it is such service which takes the aspirant to the goal most rapidly. 
The value of service is dependent upon the kind of 
the good which is secured through 

TRUE SERVICE 
it. Ministering to the bodily needs 
BEGINS AFTER 
of others is service; cultivation of 
REALIZATION 
the intellect of others is service; feeding the hearts of people is service; satisfying the æsthetic require­

ments of society is service. But all these forms of service are not of the same value, though they might all be accompanied by the spirit of selflessness. The kind of well-being which is sought through service will depend upon the vision of the person, and he who has the clearest perception of final good will be in a position to render the most important and valuable type of service. 
Those who have not found the Supreme Truth are incapable of this highest type of service. Their service cannot have for the creation the same value as the service of a person who has arrived at finality in spiritual understanding. In a sense, true service begins after realization. 
But the spirit of service which is invariably present in aspirants and good persons can be harnessed and creatively utilized for spiritual purposes, if it is allied 
with the work of a Master. The 
SERVICE OF THE Master serves the whole universe 
MASTER FACI­LITATES EN-out of the finality of his infinite 
LIGHTENMENT consciousness, and those who 
serve the Master and obey him also have their share in his universal work. Their service has the advantage of his wisdom and insight. Willing participation in the work of the Master not only raises the value of service, but creates best opportunities for spiritual enlightenment. In importance, service originating in the instructions of the Master is second only to the service rendered by the Master himself. 
For most persons the idea of service is inextricably 
bound with the securing of certain definite 
SERVICE MUST BE  or  other  difficulties  and  
FREE FROM  handicaps  which  thwart  the  
ATTACHMENT TO  flourishing  of  individual  or  
RESULTS  social life. This is the type of  
service  rendered  by aspirants,  


results in the objective world. Thus, for them, service consists in the removal of human suffering or illiteracy 
politicians, social reformers and other good persons. Now, though this type of service is of immense spiritual importance, it is in its very nature unending. In spite of what any individual might attain in these fields, there always remains much that is to be achieved. Therefore, as long as the idea of service is thus tied to the idea of results, it is inevitably fraught with a sense of incompleteness. There can be no realization of infinity through the pursuit of a never-ending series of consequences. 
Those who aim at sure and definite results through the life of service have an eternal burden on their minds. On the other hand, the service which comes after the realization of the Truth is a spontaneous expression of the spiritual understanding of the true 
SERVICE AFTER 
nature of the Self: and though it 
REALIZATION IS 
also brings about important
ESSENTIALLY 
results in the objective world, it 
DIFFERENT FROM 
is in no way complicated by any 
SERVICE BEFORE 
longing for them. As the sun REALIZATION shines because it is his nature to 
do so and not because he wants to achieve something through it, the God-realized person also lives a. life of self-offering 
because of the basic structure of the Divine Life which is at the heart of Reality and not because he longs to achieve anything. His life is not a reaching out towards something with the hope of some kind of attainment. He does not seek enrichment through attainments, but is already established in the fullness of the realization of the Infinite. The overflow of his being is a blessing to the life in other forms, and actually brings about their upliftment from the material as well as spiritual point of view. But since his own happiness is grounded in the realization of the divinity within him, it does not suffer any diminution to the imperfection or suffering of life in other forms, and his consciousness is not tinged by the ache of something unrealized. There is a vast gulf between service before the realization of the Truth and service after realizing it. The life of the Master is a life of Service: it is a perpetual offering to other forms of his own self. But this service which is characteristic of the life of a God-realized person is essentially different from the kind of service which is found in the lives of those who have not realized the Truth. 
. 
