A portion of an 
Address by Dr. Harry Kemore 


FEBRUARY 16, 1970 


It is interesting to note that in the Avatar's Prayer, which is a prayer of highest praise to Almighty God, we are praising the Highest of the High and not the lowest of the low. Meher Baba is Everything and He has stated that He is the lowest of the low as well as the Highest of the High, but one can never realize one's Ultimate if one expresses in one's life the lowest of the low. When we strain to develop our potential only, we are manifesting the lowest of the low in Baba, but when we strive to realize our Ultimate we are emphasizing the Highest of the High in Baba. 

There is no such thing as bad; there is only good. When we say that something is "bad, " we are designating the least or minimum degree of goodness as "bad." We can say that there is good and "ungood." There is no vice, only virtue and "unvirtue" (vice being the minimum degree of virtue). Therefore, the lowest of the low is expressed in those qualities which we look upon as recessive, retrogressive or debasing and which will only bring aspersion to ourself and our conduct. 

At all times we should express in our lives that which represents and emphasizes the Highest of the High. If we do anything other than that, we are letting down our God, Meher Baba. The Mandali were very conscious about this letting down of Baba. Baba's role as man with His Mandali at work and play was so natural they came to feel as though He were one of them. On the face of it, this is not an easy feat. Just as one has to be really good to execute perfectly an imperfect performance, Meher Baba, 

as God-man, fitted Himself 

perfectly as a man into the pattern 

of living with His Mandali. When 

the Mandali would see a lover, a 

devotee or some interested 

"shopper" come for Darshan with 

Baba and see the enthusiasm with 

which such a person would 

prostrate himself before Babañthe 

sudden gush of tears in the eyes 

and the over-whelming emotion in 

Baba's Presenceñthe Mandali 

would be wont to smile at these 

apparent antics. But they would 

have to check themselves, for 

otherwise they would be letting 

down Baba in His Love for His 

lovers. They were merely the 

onlookers or spectators. In fact, 

they were not supposed to be 

there. 



There were many occasions when someone came and asked a question of Baba. The visitor would look around and want to know, "Why are all these people here?" meaning the Mandali. Baba would say, "Why are you looking? You see only Baba here. You are seeing no one but Baba. Everything is Baba. There is nobody but Baba here. So say what you have to say and it will be in the strictest confidence." There≠fore, we must express at all times the Highest of the High and never let Baba down. 

When we criticize othersñ 

especially other lovers of Babañ 

those who, in our opinion, have 

not yet arrived at a basic 

understanding of Meher Baba's 

Advent or those who are in heart 

difficulty and do not know the way, 

we are letting Baba down. If we 

become jealous of others who are 

striving to emphasize the Highest 

of the High in Baba activities, we 

are letting Baba down. If we feel 

aggrieved because we have not 

been a part of bona fide Baba 

activities and we cast aspersion 

upon those who are sincerely 

lending their efforts in the direction 

of spreading Baba's Word, we are 

also letting Baba down. 

How can we express what 

Meher Baba has come to give to 

the world in our daily activities? It 

is very simple. We should try to 

build up as many good 

impressions in our lives as we 

possibly can. The bad impress≠

sions are ever with us. When the 

soul got a human form it got with 

it the accumulated load of 

evolutionary sanskaras (impress≠

sions, habits, desires) , nearly all 

of the bad ("ungood") tendencies 

that were accumulated in that 

evolutionary trek to get to the 

human form. 

The respect that I have for 

every human being is that he 

"made it," even as I have "made 

it," to a human form. And that's 

quite an accomplishment, even at 

that. But the animal sanskaras 

which are the bad or "ungood' 

sanskarasñthose which we have 

to continuously work to erase and 

to neutralize--must be supplanted 

by good impressions. Whenever 

"ungood" or bad impressions are 

expressed around you in the 

business or social world, 

counteract them immediately with 

good impressions. If someone 

appears to be critical of another 

person, you should come forward 

and talk about the good points of 

that person. 

This came very strikingly to me when I was taught by Meher Baba. 

Now when I use the term "I," I am not using it in an egotistical sense. If all of you close your eyes and become "blind," you can only know what happens to you person≠ally. You can interpret what hap≠pens to you only in terms of what strikes your consciousness (through your hearing, sense of smell, and sense of touch) directly. You can use the terms "they," "those," or "them," only if someone else whispers it into your ear be≠cause, under the circumstances, you cannot see what "they," "them," or "those" are doing. Thus, you have to use the personal pronouns "I," "me," and "my." This is not egotistical; you're simply reporting a personal experience. May I mention a personal exper≠ience? 

Meher Baba was being taken to His room in His sedan chair after I had finished the day's treatment with Him. One of the women Man≠dali was to supervise me in getting over to Baba's house and then up the outside spiral stairway because at that time Baba was using the upstairs room in His house as His bedroom. This was not accessible to the Darshanees visiting Meher≠azad last year. Well, when she took hold of me and we started to move, my knee crashed into one of the hitching posts that was still staved into the floor of the "tent" (the Mandali hall at Meherazad) where Baba had been given treatment. 



This was an extremely painful 

trauma and I limped all the way to 



the veranda of Baba's house. Baba 

wanted to know what had hap≠

pened and when I explained, He 

immediately said, "Ah!!" He knew 



what was going through my mind. I 

was thinking, ''This so-and-so! Why 

is she so careless?" and so on. 

Then Baba said, "Look. Doesn't 

she take care of your room? She 

makes the bed nicely, she keeps 

the room neat and tidy, she sees 

that the things on your bureau are 

in their proper place, she takes 

care of the toilet facilities, she 

serves you your meals, she 

washes and irons your clothes," 

and enumerated all of the good 



and helpful actions of this person in 

order to counteract the bad 

impressions 



This example is explicit. If you 

find that someone is expressing 

jealousy of someone else, em≠

phasize the wonderful things this 

other person has done to help somebody. In other words, when you find a bad impress-sion being exercised, counter-act it immediately with a good one. 

Meher Baba stated that every time you criticize someone or are jealous of what another person is doing, or any time you feel enmity or exercise a base emotion against someone, you've become the laundryman for that person. You're taking those bad sanskaras you're criticizing and attracting them to your own consciousness. Also, should you agree with someone's criticism of another's words and deeds, you likewise become a partner in this "soap and water" business. You're plastering yourself with the dirt of these bad sanskaras and rendering the criticized one free of his bad sanskaras. Therefore, you commit self-injury while the real culprit goes scott free and clean. 

These impressions are subtle; but the more you keep hacking away with your criticism, the more hardened these bad impressions become in you. You not only pay for the washing and the water, but you also pay for the soap as well. You pay for the whole laundry operation. You "desanskaracise" the one criti≠cized, and you "resanskaracise" yourself. If you dislike what someone is doing or saying, do not advertise it openly to others behind his back. Instead, tell it to him openly, face to face. This will not be criticism, but an open dissent or opposite point of View which can be resolved then and there. Should you openly voice your disagreement, dissent or disapproval, you're honestly trying to arrive at an agreement. However, should you then go into the next room-out of sight and hearing of this person-voicing the same disagreement or disap≠proval, and at the same time im≠pugning his character and alleg-ing pernicious motives as the reason for his "non-agreement," then this constitutes backbiting and criticism and puts you de-finitely into the laundry business. Thus, you see that everybody is the laundryman for everyone else. It so happens that George is the laundryman for Tom, and Tom for Harry, and Harry for Dick, and so on down the line. We're all in the same racket, and there is a . wonderful sanskaric exchange! Therefore, if you don't want to become other 



people's laundryman, you've got to exercise what Meher Baba has come to give us. If you've come to Baba because you expect that this is going to be the new way of life, don't drag in the old habits and tendencies from other books, organizations, cults or religious groups from which you've become a fugitive. You've got to leave them where you left that organization or that group, and you've got to come to learn the new way. And unless you learn and apply the new pulsating way, you are not a lover of Meher Baba. 

This new life with Meher 

Baba can be summed up with His 

words: "Love is the only thing that 

counts; let this Love be the eternal 

guide in your life." There is no 

such thing as lust; there is only 

love. Again, according to definition, 

lust is only the least degree of 

love. Should you put lust (anything 

that gives you the feeling of 

satisfaction or self-gratification) 

into action, then you are 

expressing the lowest of the low in 

Baba and increasing your burden 

of sanskaras. Meher Baba has 

emphatically stated, "Never put 

lust into action." 

Then let us be careful. We 

want to promote the Highest of the 

High; we want to hold Meher Baba 

high! He is the Highest of the High, 

and He has lived His life so that 

we can know that as the 

Incarnation of Love and of Truth, of 

absolute Honesty and Perfection, 

we have a model that is the finest 

and the best. It may be the hardest 

to imitate, but it will give us the 

greatest amount of joy! Jai Baba, 

every one!" 