THE biographies of saints and real seekers of Spiritual Life have shown how they all had to stand suffering in overcoming of their imperfections. About St. Francis of Assisi it was said that "What he hated most, he embraced with Love". That Victory of Love which conquered even the repul­sion to the lepers' wounds has brought Him nearer to Christ and at once raised Him above mortals. 
All those Saints have been made new in the purifying fire of pain and endurance. 
Avoidance of suffering is lack­ing in widsom and resignation to the One Law which governs all. Embracing suffering with a strong heart turns pain into Bliss and invites the Grace of the Perfect Master which crowns the Path. 
Life's experience has marked those who suffered with greater understanding and kindness; those who suffered little are poor and 
• 
cold in heart. Unwavering faith­fulness to the One on whom the whole heart and life have to be focussed will make them alive in unceasing spiritual state of aware­ness and lead them to unself­conscious Oneness and Love. 
In simplicity of surrender to the Master one becomes stripped off of all false decorum and the mind does not seek the vanity and satisfactions of entertaining thoughts, words and imaginations. The ego has been faced and exposed. In that honest nakedness one is nothing; the whole being and life is spontaneously at the service for the work of the Perfect Master. 
Being cleared of the ego is like extracting the tooth whose venom was poisoning the whole system. This extraction naturally involves a resistance and difficulty as in the process of evolution the roots of ego become engraved. Half way 

would lead nowhere, so the complete giving in and up of the ego which was the source of illusion and venom can alone assure the union with the Higher Self. The very longing for freedom and Truth is latent in all living beings as an unfailing inner voice, as a forward driving potential impetus, as an eternal protecting security of God. There is in the heart of creation a yearning for real beauty of life; this reaching out for Harmony with the higher ideals is inscribed in all things and forms as an impelling momentum that moves life's course towards its pre­destined end. 
This world's yearnings and signs of pain conceal an immortal hope for permanent Reality of True Happiness. Without that hope and intuitive certainty suffer­ing would be a tool of destruction and hatred. Yet sublimated suffering leads to resurrection. 
Desparation may even bring one to the point of such spiritual readiness that it may be compared with death in life, with real death of dying to oneself as says Meher Baba: "Such dying means real living the Spiritual Life in harmony with the Law, in peace of mind and unchanging joy of fulfilment. " 
The Masters warn the aspirants of the dangers of enjoying and using the psychic powers. On the fourth plane, Meher Baba says, the allurements are especially fatal. They make one linger in contentment of experiencing this state and they delay advancement. It may lead to over-estimation of themselves and of their attain­ments. The guidance of Perfect Ones saves from the clouds of delusions and failures. 
The shortest of shortcuts 
implied by Meher Baba, is the 
reversing of former selfish attitudes into direct practising of selflessness in the very same conditions of life and sociability of everyday’s existence. That mental renunciation lived in active life is made possible and is quickened by the help of the Master, as He awakens the new impulse of pure life. His Divine Love and purifying influence lift the spirit of the disciple and such relationship in itself becomes the holy of holies in the disciple's life and a New Pure Source of unexting­uishable Joy. 
The unalloyed Love which radiates from Him fills the 

hearts with new life vigour, willingness and devotion which lead to complete regeneration spontaneously and open the source of new happiness. 
There is no greater religion, no greater sanctity, no purer Beauty and Godliness than Love Divine Universal. The Perfect Master Meher Baba is that very love pouring fourth from the Infinite Source of His God-consciousness. He inspires and bestows Love on all who are close to him in heart: what a supreme compensation on the arduous Path of self-transformation! This Love is a real universal antidote of suffering: "It contains simultaneously all the spiritual qualities of inspiration, intuition and joy," which is in harmony with the very will of the Spirit, seeking the union with the Soul—or God, says Meher Baba. 
Seeing God in the very suffering, says the Master, will reconcile with suffering. 
Becoming one with God will bring one out of suffering by trans­cending suffering and by freeing from the alloy of human imper­fections, Perfect Happiness and joy unalloyed can be expected perma­nently in a Perfect State of Being. 
Love is the nearest to God natural spontaneous experience of the heart drowned in Bliss and happiness. "Love is the beginning and the end of spiritual Path", says Baba. It moves one to do and accomplish what is impossible to limited human capacity—to yield the selfish ‘ I ’ and to make one fit for Perfection. 
The perfect state of Joy will sing its sublime Hymn in finest tones when all in man becomes pure and One. To this sacred state all are des­tined by God providing they choose the Path of spiritual Truth. 
Joy is essential in all life and is increasing as one moves on guided by the Master. The awakening of Love is the beginning of the expansion of the heart. Its ever growing purity brings the Joy to its natural beauty and intensity no more deluded and not be-clouded by the impure distorted mind conditions of ignorance and selfishness. Purity, beauty and fullness of the sound of a Perfect instrument is incomparable to a false defective sound of an inferior instrument. The joys of expansion and aliveness in increasing renewal of the heart 

is a source of greater endurance and understanding which help to bear the imminent trials and tests. These trials involve suffering and are born of suffering; it is inevitable in transition from one degree to another; each stage of consciousness is subject to its joys and pains of adjustments. It is a process of renewed re-births in higher states, in purer joys of selfless being. It is crowned by the Grace of the Beloved, by an unending bliss of pure unalloyed joy of Divine Love known only by the Perfect Soul who has passed over all sorrows. The following words of Khalil Gibran will express the deep meaning of Joy, of love and its suffering in beautiful verses—real master­piece of spiritual understanding about which Meher Baba said once: "It is me". 
''When love beckons to you— 
follow him, Though His ways are hard and 
steep, And when His wings enfold 
you—yield to Him, Though the sword hidden among 
His pinions may wound you. And when He speaks to you— 
believe in Him, 
Though His voice may shatter your dreams as the north wind lays waste the garden. 
For even as love crowns you so shall He crucify you, even as He is for your growth, so is He for your pruning. 
Even as He ascends to your height and caresses your tenderest branches that quiver in the sun, 
So shall He descend to your roots and shake them in their clingings to the earth. 
Like sheaves of corn He gathers you into Himself, He threshes you to make you naked. 
He lifts you to free you your husks. 
He grinds you to whiteness. 
He needs you until you are pliant, 
And then He assigns you to His sacred fire, that you may become sacred bread for God's sacred feast. 
All these things shall love do unto you that you may know the secrets of your heart, and in that knowledge become a frag­ment of Life's Heart. 
But in your fear you would seek only love's peace and love's pleasure 
Then it is better for you that you cover your nakedness 

THE HAPPINESS OF SUFFERING 
and pass out of love's threshing 
floor, Into the seasonless world where 
you shall laugh, but not all of 
your laughter, and weep, but not 
all of your tears. Love gives naught but itself and 
takes naught but from itself. Love possesses not nor would it be 
possessed. For Love is sufficient unto Love!'' 
Such love can be inspired and grafted into the hearts of men and make them drop and step out of the old self, as if it never was. Love becomes triumphant as it takes all of the heart and remains for ever focussed on itself, the source of which is the Divine Heart of the Perfect One. 
Such Love is beyond the capacity of men. The Divine Love and Power of Meher Baba can make the disciple so pure and steady that his heart remains balanced and pitched in the height of the Spirit without falling back or without being affected. It is also due to the great share of the disciple himself—who simultan­eously with the help of the Master must follow in response to His Love, in response of inner obedi­ence to His inner order; it takes the full conscious and unconscious willingness of response, the real inner nonresistance in being, in mind, in will, in heart to bring the disciple to His height. 
Swami Vivekananda speaks of his sublime experience of Love in the following lines: 
"The madness of human love is only a faintest echo of the mad love of the saints! 
"The reward of Love is Love! and what a reward that is! It is the only thing that takes off all sorrows, the only cup by the drinking of which the disease of the world is vanished, man becomes divinely man and forgets He is that man. 
"That is the madness of Love where all desires have vanished, who cares for salvation, who cares to be perfect even, who cares for Freedom, says Love. 
''Let me be born again and again amid all the evils that are in the World—I will not complain but let me love Thee and that for Love's sake.'' In all human misery and conscious and unconscious striv­ing for happiness it is really Love that men seek and 

need. This human restlessness is the sign of an unexpressed state of longing for natural expansion, a hunger for a richer tone in being, for a steady rhythm of greater Joy unalloyed by sensations and selfish enjoyments of senses; it wants love unchecked by bar-gainings of the mind, unrestrained by the chains of the ' I ', it reaches out for full amplitude and high voltage of full experience—in short, it seeks that which we find in the only Beings on earth—the Perfect Masters. Born of selfless­ness, Oneness and Purity of Love, such Joy and Bliss brings one above pain and pleasure of human dual experiences. The beauty of this Pure State is superhuman, so great and powerful it is, that none can approach and contain it unprepared. To see Him as He is— is a Grace. The disciple must be ready to become one with Him and this Grace is given only at the Will of the Master. In utter self-abandonment the disciple unself­consciously, impersonally fulfills His Will which simply and spont­aneously becomes his own as the outcome of the greatest and most difficult victory over the egoism of the human state. 
''Fear, doubt, scepticism are not of the spirit", says Baba. Humble patient resignation and reverence to that which is beyond the human reach and therefore so often incomprehensible is the first requirement of discriminative attitude and it would spare the ridicule and sacrilege of incom­petence. 
The contacting of the Perfect Master Meher Baba should be sought at all costs as the only real good and true security of Happiness and true Life. 
No presumption of pride and over-estimation of themselves should retain any, however great and learned they may be, or even spiritually advanced, from seek­ing the blessings of the Divine Love of the Master. That contact is potent with incomparable spiritual benefit, which no suffering can prevent and which no mortals can impart to each other. 
All the mystics and spiritual poets like Kabir, Hafiz and others, especially Persian poets, have left beautiful gems in poetic verses glorifying the Pure Beloved and His Divine Love as the Secret of all Truth. 
That Divine Love—pure, self­less and universal—is God—says Meher Baba; through His Love, 

THE HAPPINESS OF SUFFERING 
He brings to God. Love is the Signatura Divina on the heart of all creation revealed fully in the God-man. Love Divine, the Pure unalloyed Joy and Bliss is the Love of the God-man. 
With each spiritual cycle life goes on revealing the greater need for more understanding of spiritual Truth. It is profitable to all seekers to use the Grace of the present age in the person of the Keeper of the Universe, in charge of its spiritual destiny. 
The present universal Perfect Guide—Meher Baba—will reveal Truth in greater fullness, which will remove accumulated ignor­ance and help in true and right understanding of Truth so much of Truth was distorted and concealed, so much has given only in hints and parables, because mankind has been still in the cradle. 
It is to the highest spiritual advantage of the seekers to come with the open eyes and with a heart attuned to a new inner spiritual grasp and receptivity, that they may know the alive experience and the new joy of awakening. 
Let the heart long even with the pain of longing and with all its restlessness for the One who can so Love and help as none. 
That longing itself, that suffering of longing is a blessed­ness, says the Master—the nearest to Love and it may bring the seeker of Love to the Beloved. 
Kabir says: 
"He sheds abroad the radiation of Love! Touch His feet who is One and indivisible, immutable and peaceful; who fills all vessels to the brim with Joy and whose form is Love!" 
"What a day of gladness is that day in which my Beloved who is my treasure comes to my house! All evils fly from my heart when I see my Lord. My love has touched Him! My heart is longing for the name which is Truth!" 
Also: 
"My heart is frenzied and I disclose in my soul what is hidden. I am immersed in that one great Bliss which transcends all pleasures and pain!" 
"Listen my brother! 
"Bring the vision of the Beloved in your heart. 
''This sings Kabir—the servant of all servants!" 
And this is singing in all hearts who have received His Love Divine and who took His name— Meher Baba—as their salvation in New Life, Pure, Beauty and Truth. 
