Since my return from India, where I spent eight months with Baba, I have frequently been asked questions concerning His method of working with His devotees. Some of these questions are difficult to answer, for the simple reason that Baba's methods follow no ordinary occult pattern. When, therefore, I am asked, "Does he give initiation?" I cannot answer “Yes”, nor can I answer “No”, because His method of working with souls is more of the mystical way, which blinds the psychic eyes of the disciple until he reaches the safe harbour of union with God. No doubt many stations or initiations are passed on the way, but not with the disciple's conscious knowledge that certain stages have been reached or specific powers attained. 
By this blind-folded method, which it must be admitted is particularly difficult for the intellectual mind to accept, but which Baba says is the safe and perfect way that all Perfect Masters use with their disciples, the many pitfalls of the intermediate psychic and mental planes are avoided. Not only are we prevented from misusing spiritual power, which we might likely do unless the ego were completely eliminated, but we are less 

likely to become ensnared in spiritual pride. 
Among people who claim to have taken various "initiations", and who have perhaps various psychic gifts, we play a most humble role! We have no tricks to perform. We have only the love of our Master to pass on to others. I say “only”, but for those who are responsive to Divine Love this eventually proves to be a far greater gift or blessing than those psychic faculties which lesser teachers bestow upon their pupils. 
Since the West has had so little personal experience with an incarnate Perfect Master, it may be helpful to describe in a general way what that contact involves. Although Baba deals with every soul in an individual way, there are certain general principles which He seems to use with all who voluntarily surrender their lives to Him. First, the heart is awakened. At whatever level the soul may be functioning, it responds to Him with deep, pure, but personal love. This "personal" love seems to be an essential factor in the Master-disciple  relationship,  and  for the reason that I shall suggest. When the devotee's love has been deepened and tested in many ways, through frequent outer contacts and subsequent outer separations, the inner drawing and withdrawal is accentuated. The two processes may or may not be simultaneous with each other, but whether the inner withdrawal takes place while one is with Baba, or separated from Him, physically, the inner drawing is ecstatic in its effect, while the companion withdrawal is the keenest agony. Baba explained one day: "It is my way of working. I draw you to me, and I push you away; then I draw you closer and push you farther away, until, at last, I draw you so close that you become one with me, forever." 
The period of withdrawal corresponds to the “Dark Night” of the Christian mystics, and it is well named. During this phase the soul is subject to doubts of every sort and kind, to despairs and torments which the soul may never before have experienced, but which are found to reside in the deeper layers of the sub-conscious. Its former glimpses of light or love 

now seem like the vague memory of a dream. The most profound spiritual experience of the past seems like nothing more than a mirage. The soul feels encased in a walled-in universe, and a very small one at that, and beyond that wall it is powerless to penetrate, because for the time being it cannot believe that anything of Reality exists. It calls upon its Master, and no response comes; it calls upon the impersonal God, and receives no answer. It feels like a captive bird which beats its wings against the bars of its cage, and tries to find solace in its very bruises and pains. But nothing avails; for this is the period when the soul must face its awful poverty, when, stripped of God's adornments, it sees how pitiful and poor a thing it is. Because this facing must be met at some point along the way, we are told by all who have finally reached God, that the ''Dark Night" is the perfect method, for in no other way can the individual soul recognize so clearly and so quickly its own insufficiency, its stark dependence upon God. 
When, again, the soul feels God or its Master, it  realizes a  little the tremendous work which the Master has been effecting. It may still be in a twilight state, where it sees only through a veil, but even in this condition it senses the house­cleaning which has been taking place, the emotional purification which is being achieved. Also it is helped to a clearer understanding of the spiritual principles of faith and love, and sees its own part in demonstrating these fundamentals of the spiritual life. 
Baba is one who perfectly prepares the dwelling in which He may later turn on the flood-lights of Divine Life. Of that later stage I cannot yet speak, but a glimpse which came to me while in India showed me conclusively why a Master's help is needed for the ultimate stage, and how in principle it works. 
In spite of the ardent desire of the soul for union, there comes a time when, of itself, it cannot further advance. Ultimately, every­thing which has contributed to our personal self-hood must go, our highest feelings as well as our lowest, our deepest intuitions, and our rational mind, with its  

conscious and sub-conscious layers deposited by ages of life exper­ience. We may know this fact, intellectually, and, with our cons­cious minds be willing or even eager for that final annihilation. But just at the moment of its consummation, when the sudden, blank nothingness overtakes us, we recoil, automatically, for the reason, that the sub-conscious, over which we have little or no control, pulls us back into our accustomed world. The chasm of nothingness over which the soul must eventually pass, in this final step, is so painful, so unfamiliar, that it draws back before the conscious mind and will can exercise control. 
It is at this crucial point that the help of the Master is essential to pull the individual soul through to its final goal. The pain involved in this crisis is the pain of being bereft of feeling, thoughts, impres­sions, everything. Consciousness remains, but consciousness of nothing. 
It may readily be seen that before a Master can render this supreme service to a disciple, a deep and personal bond must exist between them, for it requires on the part of the disciple the ultimate in trust and love. No vague, diffused devo­tion to an impersonal "principle" would suffice. A chord of love, strong and true, must connect the devotee with the Master, for it is by that chord that He draws the disciple across the great divide to Himself. 
But before this supreme moment comes, there is much to be accomplished. This "accomplish­ment" involves both the negative and positive activities on the part of the disciple. He must learn to be passive to the Master's will, but at the same time he must be intensely alert and active in meeting the problems of his own character and life; for herein lies another great principle upon which the Master works. He intensifies all the life processes exactly to the degree which the disciple is capable of mastering. 
Though it is true that the Master renders an incalculable service to the faithful disciple, it is ludicrous to suppose, as some people have inferred, that the disciple simply sits back and does nothing as       he waits to be drawn up to heaven! A disciple of Baba's may do nothing in 

the way of yogic practices which would give the comforting illusion of results attained, but that he is required by force of circumstances to work hard and deeply upon his own character is a fact we have all had amply demonstrated to us. 
In the bed-rock work upon one's thoughts, emotions and ac­tions, one gradually becomes more facile in the handling of positive and negative forces, and this practice, no doubt, is a preparation for wider work which lies ahead for the disciple. In learning to sail through the turbulent sea of nega­tive doubts, despairs and darkness, those positive elements so essential to the spiritual life are developed—courage and faith. Without these one does not travel very far on the spiritual journey. 
Another outstanding character­istic of Baba's method is the "crisis" which invariably his inten­sification of life processes induces. Whether one is with Him physi­cally or not, there come moments when certain personal traits or relationships culminate in a drama­tic situation. These "crises" reveal without any question or doubt, or smothering over 
of facts, whatever short-comings the parties concerned need to face. They are not particularly pleasant, but they are very effective—for not only does one see oneself, as though a mirror were held before one, but in a strange way a deeper harmony is born from the conflict, and in some cases. a weakness or defect of character is completely wiped out. 
These are some of the methods by which such a Master as Baba prepares those who are to be instruments for His future work. They are, of course, only the evi­dence of that part of His working such as the rational mind may easily apprehend and co-operate with. Of His deeper, inner work— that skilful untying of sanskaric impressions of thought, emotion and action, and other profound reorientations of body nerves, glands, brain-structure, one may intuitively feel, but as yet be unqualified to discuss. 
But as one's apprenticeship lengthens into long years, one knows deep within one's soul, the unerring akill, the consummate mastery of this great surgeon and father of souls, Shri Meher Baba. 

. 
