The different avenues which lead to spiritual understanding can be best understood by means of an initial distinction between spirit and matter. In order to understand matter we have 
THE SPIRIT CAN-
material means, and in order to
NOT BE UNDER-
understand the spirit we have 
STOOD THROUGH 
spiritual means. Matter is under-
THE MIND 
stood through the mind or the intellect working upon the data given through the different sensations. But the spirit can be understood only through the spirit itself. Now this highest form of understanding in which the spirit enjoys self-knowledge without using any instrument or medium is very rare and most difficult to attain; but the next best approach for the understanding of the spirit is through the heart and not through the mind. 
The mind is accustomed to work upon material things, and its driving power for this intellectual under­
standing of material objects is derived from lusts and 
cravings. So when it is turned towards spiritual problems, it tackles them along the lines to which it is accus­tomed, and in doing so it uses conceptions which it has invented for the intellectual understanding of material things. However, this approach to the understanding of spiritual problems is doomed to 
fail, because all the conceptions which the intellect evolves for the knowledge of material things are inadequate for the understanding of the spirit. It is like trying to see through the ears or hear through the eyes. If the mind tries to understand the spirit independently of the heart, it is bound to use analogues from the material world; and this inevitably leads to the spirit being looked upon as an object of the mind, which it is not. 
As contrasted with the method of the mind which has its foundation in sensations and which proceeds further through inference and proofs to conclusions, there is the more direct method of the heart which intuitively grasps the values which are progressively realised in the life of man as he goes through the diverse experiences of the world and as his attention is centred on arriving at spiritual understanding. In the life of most persons the mind and the heart are at loggerheads, and the conflict between the two creates confusion.  The heart,  which in 


its own way feels the unity of life, wants to fulfil itself through a life of love, sacrifice and service. It is keen about giving instead of taking. It derives its driving power from the inmost psychic urge expressing itself through the immediate intuitions of the inner life, and does not care for the proofs or intellectual corroborations which the mind seeks while dealing with material objects. The mind, in its objective handling of the material world, is saturated with the experiences of multiplicity and separateness, and it, therefore, feeds the ego-centric tendencies which divide man from man and make him selfish and possessive. But the heart, which in its inner experiences feels the glow of love, gets the glimpses of the unity of the spirit; and it, therefore, seeks expression through the self-giving tendencies which unite man with man and make him selfless and generous. There is, therefore, necessarily a conflict between the ''inner voice" and the deliverances of the intellect which are based upon the apparent and the superficial aspects of life. 
When the mind encroaches upon the province of the heart, it does so by requiring assurance or conviction as a condition precedent which must be fulfilled before there is a release of love. But love is nothing if it is not spontaneous. It cannot be a conclusion of reasoning. It is not a fruit of the 
spirit of bargain. If you want to be certain about the object of love before giving your love, it is only a form of calculating selfishness. 


Many persons, for example, want to be convinced about my divinity in order to be able to love me. That is to say, they want me to give them objective proofs of my spiri­tual status by performing miracles. But conviction of this type often is a hindrance rather than a help for the release of the highest form of love which is utterly regardless about what it might receive from the object of love. 
When the mind is seeking conviction or corroboration (through objective proofs and miracles as an aid to spiritual understanding), it is encroaching upon the sphere 
which properly belongs to the 
INTELLECTUAL 
heart. Convictions and cor-
CONVICTION HIN­
roborations become important
DERS SPONTANE-
when a person desires guarantee 
OUS LOVE 
for securing certain definite and tangible results in the objective world. Even if we suppose that a person is intellectually convinced about the existence of God by means of miracles or some such objective data, this will not necessarily release his heart. The allegiance which he might perhaps give to God as a result of such cold revelation will be either through fear or through the sense of duty. But love in which there ts no sense of restraint cannot be born of a conviction which is based upon things accessible to the mind. And where there is no love, there is no bliss or beauty of being. In fact, God's nature as the ocean of love cannot be grasped by the mind. God has to be known through love and not through the intellectual search after miracles. That is the reason why, for those who are closest and dearest to me, I do not perform miracles. I would rather have no following than use miracles for convincing others of my divinity. It is true that while loving me people often do have spiritual experiences which were hitherto unknown to them: and these experiences help them in the further opening of their hearts. But they are not meant to feed the mental craving for intellectual conviction; and they should not be regarded as the goal. 

When a person has his eye on the results of actions instead of his being solely concerned with their intrinsic worth, he is trying to tackle the spiritual problems 
through the mind alone; and in 
GLIMPSES OF 
doing so he is interfering with the 
THE SPIRIT CAN 
proper functioning of the heart. 
BE HAD ONLY 
Mind wants to have all kinds of 
THROUGH THE 
things, and, therefore, seeks 
HEART 
objective proofs, convictions and assurances. But this demand of the mind is a fetter for the spontaneous outflow of love which at once depends upon and furthers true spirituality. You cannot love through the intellect. What you may get through the mind is a theory of love and not love itself. The knowledge which certain types of yogis have through their minds is merely intellectual and dry. It cannot give them spirituaI bliss which characterises the life of love. Love and happiness are the only important things in life: and they are both absent in the dry and factual knowledge which is accessible to 

the intellect. Spirituality does not consist in the intellectual knowledge of true values but in their realization. It is this knowledge of inner realization which is worthy of being called spiritual understanding, and this is far more dependent on the heart than on the mind. Knowledge of the intellect alone is on the same footing as mere information; and being superficial it moves on the surface of life. It gives the shadow and not the substance of reality. The hidden depths of the ocean of life can be guaged only by the plumber of the heart. 
The intellect of most persons is harnessed by innumerable wants. Such a life is from the spiritual point of view the lowest type of human existence. The 
highest type of human existence 
FREEDOM FROM 
is free from all wants; and it is 
WANTS IS 
characterised by sufficiency or 
POSSIBLE IN 
contentment. Every one is seek-
SUPRA-MENTAL 
ing happiness, but few have it; for, 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
lasting happiness dawns only when there is complete freedom from wants. This highest state of non-wanting may outwardly seem to imply inaction and easy of attainment. But, if any one tries just to sit quietly without inwardly wanting anything and with full consciousness (i.e. without going to sleep), he will realize that such a state of nonwanting is very difficult to attain, and that it can be sustained only through tremendous spiritual activity. In fact, complete non-wanting is unattainable as long as life is mind-ridden. It is possible only 
in supra-mental existence. One has to go beyond the mind to experience the spiritual bliss of desirelessness. 
However, between the two extremes of a life haras­sed by wants and a life which is completely free from wants, it is possible to strike upon a mode of practical 
life in which there is harmony 
between the mind and the heart. 
When there is such harmony, the 
mind does not dictate the ends of 
life, but only helps to realize those 
ends which are given by the heart. 
It does not lay down any conditions to be fulfilled before any deliverance of the heart is adopted for being translated in practical life. In other words, it surrenders its role of a judge which it is accustomed to play in its intellectual querries concerning the nature of the universe, and accepts unquestioningly the dictates of the heart. 
The mind is the treasure-house of learning: but the heart is the treasure-house of spiritual wisdom. The so-called conflict between religion and science arises only 
when there is no appreciation of 
the relative importance of these 
two types of knowledge. It is 
futile to try to glean knowledge 
of the true values by the exercise of the mind alone, Mind cannot tell you which things are worth having; it can only tell you how to achieve the ends accepted from non-intellectual sources. In most persons the mind accepts ends from the promptings of wants,  


but this means the denial of the life of the spirit. It is only when the mind accepts its ends and values from the deepest promptings of the heart, that it contributes to the life of the spirit. So mind has to work in co­operation with the heart; factual knowledge has to be subordinated to intuitive perceptions: and heart has to be allowed full freedom in determining the ends of life without any interference from the mind. The mind has a place in practical life; but its roll begins after the heart has had its say. 
Spiritual understanding is born of the harmony between the mind and the heart. This harmony of the mind and the heart does not require the mixing up of their functions. It does not imply cross-functioning but co­
operative functioning. Their 
functions are neither identical 
nor co-ordinate. The mind and  
the heart must of course be 
"balanced". But this balance  
cannot be secured by pitch­
ing the mind against the heart or by pitching the heart against the mind. It can be attained not through mechanical tension but through intelligent adjustment. The mind and the heart might be said to be balanced when they serve their proper purpose and when they perform their respective functions without erring this way or that way: and it is only when they are so balanced that there can be true harmony between them. Such harmony of the mind and the heart is the most important condition of the integral undivided life of spiritual understanding. 
. 


