




I Believe in God 

BY JEAN SCHLOSS (Hollywood) 

    In these troubled days, it seems to me to be incum bent upon everyone who believes in God and in His supreme omnipotence, to reaffirm that faith and to surrender more deeply to His guidance. In so doing, we shall not only strengthen and fortify our own souls against the onslaught of doubt and despair which, in many parts of the world, is, even now, rampant; but we shall also be conscious co-operators in God's plan for the world. 

We have heard so much of man 's plans and ideas for nations and peoples, and have seen so m uch of their failure, that perhaps the tim e has com e when, not only a stray individual here and there is willing to surrender himself to a higher mind than his own, but when vast numbers of people m ay call upon God for guidance, and, having called, be willing to carry out His orders. 

In spite of the fact that the forces of greed, cruelty and dishonour seem, at the hand, I believe that God perm its these things merely to show m an how small and inef fective is his own sufficiency, and that when the lesson is deeply learned, He will turn the key by injecting into the lif e stream a new consciousness of Him self and His power. 

Thus, when we hear of innocent people being persecuted; of s mall but honourable nations bein g sacrificed to the force and greed of unscrupulous leaders; of peace-lovin g people b eing forced against their wishes into war; let us not despair, or feel that God has forsaken His creation. Such are the times when we should look up and even rejoice; for always, without fail, God permits the darkest night to precede the most radiant dawn. W ith confidence, we may know that His hour draws near. What we are witn essing to-day is simply the logical outcom e of m an 's attempt to organize him self and his world on a purely m aterialistic basis. In the material world, intellect is God, and the laws of the spiritual world, such as love and faith, are denied and scorned. God, we are told, is a rem nant of the race 's childhood, when it w as not strong enough to stand on its own feet, or when it had no highly developed intellect to guide it. 



Well, presumably, the race can now stand alone, since so m any reject the idea of God, and the enthroned intellect rules man 's activities with such re sults as we have only to read the daily newspapers to see. Does it encourage us to continue to base our lives on this hypothesis? Or, have we com e to the place where we are willing to try another way of lifeóGod' s wayóin which we, as individuals and nations, surrender our wills, our lives to Him? 

   Certainly the need at this time is for people whose intensity of spirit is great enough to com pel their unqualified surrender. But this k ind of capitulation cannot be m ade to an Im personal Principle. It must be made to that Divine Incarnation, whose "glory the heaven of  heavens cannot contain", yet whose  love may dwell in every humble heart. An abstract principle n ever turned a self-centred m an into a God-filled one. For this kind of trans≠formation, man 's heart must be awake≠ned by deep inner experience with the personal aspect of God, that four dimensional personality inherent in all life, yet at the sam e time transcending it; that personality which, from time to time throughout the ages, takes form as perfect man, and through that for m makes himself the Way by which others may find liberation. 

    Some there are who, in com ing into physical life, never com pletely lose their contact with this personal God. For them, whether He is incarnate or not, He is the great R eality of their lives. But others need to contact Him in the flesh in order to h ave their lives attuned to His. This Holy One m any of us now recognize in our beloved Master, Baba. 

   He comes, as He has always come, to free man from his bonda ge to self, and through this freedom to lift him to a higher plane of being. He com es to demonstrate anew God 's love for His children by making Himself the Living W ay. He comes as the great Awakener of m an 's heart, and through the love that is thereby quickened, He binds the souls which He redeem s fast to His own heart. 



And probably He comes to the world as a whole, because its belief in the personal God has grown faint or become overlaid with encrustations of formalism and conventional religion. 

    Being what He is, His powe r in human lives who place their trus t in Him is lim itless. But, just as we h ave always been taught, it is m ost effective in those liv es who seek nothing, ask nothing, but His will. T here are so me who have com e to Him asking for certain spiritual graces. Perhaps He has vouchsafed them glimpses of these things, or perhaps He has not. But often it is jus t these people who eventually turn from Him, with their sense of justice outraged, that He does not fulfil their requests in the way they think best. 

Though our desires maybe of the highest, spiritually, yet when He pro≠ceeds to clear away just those thing s in us which impede our spiritual free-dom, how often we cry, "Not this Lord, not this!" It is a hum an cry and one which was f elt even in the hear t of Jesus, as He hung upon the cross. But it is important for us also to remember the cry which f ollowed it. "Nevertheless, not my will but Thine be done!" 

Until we have this kind of faith in God, we cannot get very far as in≠dividuals or as nations. Im posing upon God our idea of what is best for us is a bastard kind of fait h. Yet we see today whole systems of religion and phil≠osophy based on this principle of im ≠pressing upon the m ind of God our needs, our desires. Physical well-being, material prosperity and our idea of personal happiness is assum ed as our right, and God is worked upon to produce these things for us. And often He does, for this m ethod can be made to produce the desired results. But does it necessarily follow that these things are what we need to lib erate our souls? And can we honestly believe that God is interested in anyth ing but tha t one supreme objective? Can we seriously think that God who has created the wonders of this universe, who has given to man the form of Himself and the capacity to realize in his soul the fullness of God, is really concerned with our desire for a new car, or relief from that pain ? The pain may, in fact, be an evidence of God working in us to ef fect in His own way our greater freedom. 



Just as th e intellect will never o pen the door to the kingdom of the spirit, so will this self-seeking kind of faith never bring to our eart h the kingdom of heaven. For that we need an unques≠tioning faith which asks nothing, yet receives everything, for in abandoning ourselves wholly to God we make it possible for Hi m, not only to bestow upon us the lesser gifts of the spirit, but to give to us the suprem e gift of Himself. 

    It is very sim ple, yet very profound, this yoga of God surrender, this ultimate in f aith. It brin gs into play in our lives the highest protection, the wisest guidance and the m ost amazing working out of any problem or question which confronts us. It operates in ways which would confound the rational mind, but its results are sure and far- Reaching. 

Not in a m oment shall we ach ieve this complete surrender, but, as we advance towards it, we have increasing confirmations that our f aith is not mis≠placed or misguided. In fact, the more we exercise this spiritual sinew of faith, the more speedily we carve our way on the road to Reality. Life now becomes a glorious thing, a superb adventure which offers us the utmost of joy and complete satisfaction. The sen ses, which normally contact but the surface of things, now pe netrate to the inwardness of life, to the essence of the rose's fragrance, the joy within the song, the light beyond the sunset. Nor are the confirm ations we receive merely of a subjective order. W e see human relationships harm onized; conflicts resolved; problems untangled; love awakened or reborn. 

Now that He dwells with us again in human form, the m agic of His love is vastly accelerated. One need no t meet Him outwardly to f eel deeply the contact with His spir it and to ex≠perience in one 's life the tra ns≠formations He makes possible, if we 



surrender our lives to Him. Master, Baba. It is be lief in th is One 

It is b elief in this One which I which I would have others share in proclaim, that lovely One whom I have order that the day of His manifestation known for m any years, and whom I may be has tened and that the world 's now serve in the human  form of  my misery may be turned into spiritual joy. 

ï 