
MEHER Baba's mission in life is purely spiritual—to awaken humanity to its divine birth-right and heritage. For that purpose, he has contacted thousands in India as also in the West those that have come to him and those to whom he has himself gone. And what wonderful transformation he has brought about in them? Without a word of mouth for the last fifteen years, he has touched the tenderest chords of human hearts with that look of love in his eyes or the loving touch of his hands, and awakened the latent spark of spirituality within them in a manner that is masterly. Its unique technique is simply bewildering and too amazing for words. To awaken Divine Love in thousands who never saw him or heard of him in their lives, just in a momentary personal contact and without uttering a syllable, is in itself a feat unparalled In the history of Masters. 
Amongst those who have con­
tacted him there are many true spiritual aspirants who have themselves delved deep into the spiritual literature with which the world's libraries are full and have actually practised various processes of spiritual austerites for years without the least sign of inner development. To speak in their own words, what this reading of volumes of literature or hearing platform sermons on religious and spiritual subjects and practising even Yoga Sadhanas (penances} couldn't bring out in years, Meher Baba's personal contact for a few moments achieved in a manner that has amazed them. 
We reproduce in these columns a few excerpts from letters, show­ing some of the most spontaneous experiences of the hearts that the Master has touched with the Divine Love that he radiates, and these will speak for themselves as to what amazing revelations the Mas-ter's contact has brought to them. 

(1) My Dear Sadguru, Your presence is fragrant with Divine Love. 
The beauty and magic of it can heal all of man's wounds and free his soul from bondage. 
The spontaneous embrace brought me very close to the arms of the Infinite, and the radiance in your eyes was like a benediction from the Heavenly Father. 
Life for me holds greater con­sciousness of joy, a deeper understanding of love and high purpose for having spent a few eternal moments within the warmth of your aura. 
You are making a troubled world happier and wiser—and I lay a humble boquet of my deep and everlasting love in your lap. 
A.M. 
(2) Beloved Master, The dear ones who are sailing 
for India to-day to be in the presence of him who is humanly Divine and Divinely-human, are 
taking with them my heart full of Love and of longing to be with them. 
This letter they will hand personally to you, Beloved Master, that the sense of separation may be more fully wiped out of my consciousness and that at the proper time, I may stand face to face with Him, in the flesh. 
The contact has been made and in Truth I know that there is neither time nor space, and that nothing can separate us from the Love of God. 
Humbly I come before Thee and I know that Thy Grace will fill my nothingness and Thy Unfolding Love burn away all my inhibitions. 
Hold me close to that great Love, Beloved Master, and may my eyes never turn away from facing Him, who through all eternity has been wooing me. 
I am hoping to be kept in close communication with the dear ones who are leaving here to-day, knowing that their messages will fan up the flame in my heart and make me a Light, however small, to help illumine the darkened minds. 
That Thy Grace may fall down over my upward vision and undo the laws of matter and of mind is the sincere prayer of 
M.C. 
(3) 
May all America and the rest of the world feel the
Christ spirit which is Baba. We are the spiritual guidance I received by in need of his pure Love and real contact with Baba's Divinely freedom. It is not possible to illuminated soul. express adequately my deep M. appreciation and gratefulness for 
