All conscious acts of human beings, through free will, are executed by the heart. They are not performed through reason, without a sanction from the heart. Reason at best can induce the heart to accept an undertaking; it cannot compel it. It can manipulate a proposition and present it to the heart that it may accept or reject it. The heart will not accept anything that reason alone likes. Propositions said to have been accepted by reason and transmuted to action are those that have necessarily been accepted by the heart. They are not recognized by the heart straight from experience. The intermediary of reasoning gathers and compiles them, and in the light of relative value compares them with the past experiences, and makes them palatable for the heart. But the final sanction has always to come from the heart. A heart compelled to perform certain acts becomes rebellious and finds its own means of opposing them. Its dictates 
cannot always be suppressed without danger to its opponent. A heart may be soft or hard. Its laxity or hardness is dependent on its quality. The most lenient views on a subject interpreted unfavourably by head may be accepted by a soft heart, whereas a hard heart may reject the same views presented very favourably by the keenest of intellect. 
The life of intellect as covering the entire field of man's activities is bunkum, and one who professes himself to be entirely guided by intellect is either self-deluded or a hypocrite. Intellect has its part to play. It is a tool to dispel clouds of superstition gathered on the mirror of the heart. Its task should begin in right earnest when the heart is heavily laden with superstitious con­ceptions. They deter acceptance of a just and reasoned out proposition. But on no account should the in­tellect be allowed to trespass the pure regions of the heart which nourishes selfless love. 

Should it become uncompromising for the head to restrain interfering with the heart, the cause is an arrogance born of learning or circumstances. 
The heart governs a. man's activities truly and simply. It has no pros and cons to compare. It is its own judge. What it accepts is pure. Its purity admits of nothing but the pure. It works gently and deep. All jerky and impatient movements that seem to come up from the heart belong to the lower nature of man. They should not be mistaken for the promptings of the heart. They are unsteady, sudden and reactionary in effect. Deep rooted as though the seeds of animal nature are in us, they could be sublimated by the purity of heart. Low desires could be transformed into acts of selfless service. To let them seek fulfilment is paving the way for habitual degeneracy requiring rigid abstinence to overcome it. 
The heart has to be let loose in an unchequered flow to appreciate the divinity in man. Divinely experienced men express their qualities in various ways corresponding to their state of experience. It is difficult for the intellct to appreciate fully and recognize the value of spiritual experiences, unless it submits to the heart its overweening attitude. It has not to forego its power of reasoning or inference, but has to keep the mind open for a vision or judgment to enter the heart. If a pre-conceived bias prohibits an entry into the heart, one has to remove the impediment by force of knowledge and discrimination. Better still is the way to come in direct contact with persons of divine knowledge. They radiate divinity and the influence of their supra-mental bliss. They make hearts enlightened. 
There are many advanced souls who, for all outward appearances, have lost their individuality. They have become engrossed in the higher spheres of con­sciousness, and their behaviour looks incoherent with the normal surround­ings. They have ceased functioning normal, not in the sense of a deranged mind. 
The insane functions so fast mentally that his actions cannot corroborate with his movements. He tries to synchronize them, and loses all bearing relative to normal life. Princi­

pally he is attached to the objective  poorly equipped with modern  
world in an endless effort to derive  sophistry, or so regardless of his  
satisfaction from it. A spiritually  personal necessities. If it was so, a  
advanced soul is ever facing the  civilized man would look upon  
higher consciousness, and has left  contacting a savage as barbarous, and  
behind him the worldly attachments  the insane asylums of the world  
as an unimportant enterprise on the  would have no personnel to fill in  
arena. of life. The lure of the world  their offices. Supposing a man with an  
does not entrap him, nor the regularity  illumined heart rolls in dust, bites  
of life binds him down. He is as  leather, or throws stones, and is  
careless to his dire necessities as an  utterly oblivious to the sneers of a  
ordinary mad man is, at times  scandaI-monger or the jeers of a snob,  
fumbling to procure luxuries. The one  is it likely we would become an  
is resigned to a. higher life, the other is  unthinking flock of sheep if we  
a beaten down pursuer of the world.  contact him and even look after his  
Yet apparently both look alike. On  personal needs? No! Since every  
closer contact we come to distinguish  proposition of meeting a God-mad  
one from the other as a virtuous from  and contacting him does not make us  
a sinner, a God-mad from a mad-man.  unintelligent, every individual heart  
Is it illogical to contact a God-mad? If  should be given a. first chance of  
not, it is so much necessary to contact  accepting the dignity of a heart- 
a God-realized. The head does not  enlightened soul. His influence may  
prohibit us to draw ourselves nearer to  change our character, may thrash out  
the heart-enlightened persons; but the  all our intellectual conceit, and open  
arrogance of our intellect does. No  the door to an unbiased reasoning.  
intellectual understanding can ever  Such line of thinking, simple and  
bar us from living with one who is so  truthful, would lead us to a judgment  
scantily dressed, so  acceptable to the heart.  
.  
