BELUR is now a small  town in the Hassan District of the Mysore State. Halebid is to-day a little village ten miles from Belur, situated in a cup-shaped valley where tigers and wild boars are said to roam in freedom. These places were visited by Shri Meher Baba and his party of Eastern and Western disciples at the com­mencement of the important year 1940. 
The Master knows best the purpose of his visit, but it is well known that the spiritual signifi­cance of these out-of-the-way places, still lingers as symbolized in their uniquely beautiful temples that were wrought by a people of highly developed art. The glory of 
• 
the great dynasty of the Hoysala Emperors, those powerful rulers who made Halebid their capital in the twelfth century and who held sway over nearly the whole of India to the south of the river Krishna, is now legend to most people, but to one like the Master to whom past, present and future are one, coming to such a place must have a deeper meaning. 
Halebid or the 'Old Town' became so-called by the people in the seventeenth century, when the then Vijayanagar rulers built a new city at Belur and made it their capital. To-day both these ancient capitals that vied in splendour with Delhi of those days, are a series of ploughed terraces awaiting the 

spade of the excavator. Beneath this ground how many aspirations to material power, how many aspirations to spiritual attainment, lie buried! It has been said that, "where a saint walks there flowers grow up", so how much greater may be the flowering in human lives, where a Perfect Master treads! 
We are told† that a Hoysala king named Vishnuvardhana, popularly known as Bittiga, succeeded to power in about 1106 A.D. He was converted to intense faith by the great saint and philosopher, Rama­nujacharya. In commemoration of his victory against the Cholas who were the enemies of his state and of his religion, Bittiga built several temples in various parts of his state, the largest being at Belur. The chief interest in the plan of this Vishnu temple consists in the fact that the sanctum has a beautifully designed star shape while the hall is like a cross. It would be very interesting to compare this with some of our early Western type of churches. The more one travels the more one 
• 
observes that no religion has a monopoly on symbolism. Just as human nature at its base is the same, so spiritual faith at its base is founded in one Divine Creator, though being rekindled at different periods of time by saints. and avatars who lived on earth the divine life. 
That this vast plateau of Mysore was sanctified by the presence in the past of the great saint Ramanujacharya whose teaching has followers to-day throughout India, is only one incidence of the flower of perfection which this ancient land has produced. Shri Baba has stated that there are three saints living to-day in Southern India, one of whom is with the Master at his Mast Ashram having been contacted by him and brought there the end of last year. In his 'Abode for Saints' which will be established at Byramangala. as part of the Universal Spiritual Centre, there will be various types of these from many corners of India, all doing their 

•† Historical facts therein are quoted ad lib from booklets of Belur and Halebid by Dr. M. H. Krishna, M.A., D.Litt. (Lond.), Director of Archæology in Mysore. 
part in the Master's work for the spiritual upliftment of humanity. 
Concerning the temple at Halebid which Shri Baba told his disciples, as we passed through, that it had the greater spiritual atmosphere of the two temples; the art critic Ferguson states that the images which elaborate the exterior are carved "with a minute elaboration of detail which can only be reproduced by photo­graphy, and may probably be considered as one of the most marvellous exhibitions of human labour to be found even in the patient East. . . The mode in which the Eastern face is broken up by the larger masses, so as to give height and play of light and shade, is a better way of accomplishing what the Gothic architects attempted by their transcepts and projections. This, however, is surpassed by the Western front where the variety of outline, and the arrangement and subordination of the various facets in which it is disposed, must be considered as a masterpiece of design in its class." To those of the disciples who once went with the Master to view the Sistine Chapel in Rome, where the great artist Michel Angelo has decorated the inside of the dome with his artistic genius and spiritual conception, the parallel of man's highest aspirations occurred to mind. It was at that time the Master remarked to those accompanying him, that the great Italian artist's work was for the first time blessed and we could not help but think that Halebid temple was, also, blessed by the presence of the Master. 
One morning at the Hassan dak bungalow where our party had their headquarters, Shri Baba gave us a dissertation on suffering, the deeper meaning of the war and the ultimate spiritual outcome for the world. That the masses, like the individual, must achieve their spiritual liberation and that this liberation for the world would come about and remain for centuries to come. Therefore any amount of suffering and war would have its future meaning. 
Our last place of visit during this six days sojourn, was to the Baba Budan Range which is visible from Belur and separates the western tracts with their tall forests and 

coffee plantations, from the eastern country with its drier climate and scrub-covered hills. The coffee, such a boon in industry to the peasants, was first brought to Mysore from Arabia by the great Mohomedan saint for whom the Range is named. 
On our way to the Baba Budan Range we passed a sizable town named Chickmagalur and we stopped for a short time. Shri Baba had sent two of his mandali the day before and had told them where they might contact a particular mast. With the usual 'coincidences' of meeting they discovered the one described and brought him to the Master upon his arrival. This mast was small in build and had the unusually happy expression of the 'God-intoxicated' souls which the Master has found on his previous journeys throughout India, but in this case there was something whimsical and almost humorous about the man. Whatever his stage of spiritual advancement was, the "wine of the spirit" was effecting him like the ancient Sufi poets describe the longing for God, as "God-intoxication". On our return route, this mast was taken  back to Bangalore with the Master. One more "last sheep" has been added to the fold of his Mast Ashram. 
The Baba Budan Range rises 6,000 feet above sea-level, the summit of the hills consists of steep grassy slopes well wooded in the ravines, through which flow perennial streams. Numerous coffee plantations are seen along its slopes. It is best approached from Chickmagalur where there is a motorable road, and our party found the scenery remarkable. On top the range called in the Hindu Puranas "Chendra Drona" is a cave containing what the Mohomedans assert to be the tomb of Baba Budan or rather the place where his disciples were buried and he himself disappeared. The Hindus claim it to be the throne of Dattatreya and thus it is venerated as a place of pilgrimage for adherents of both faiths. As a matter of fact Shri Baba told his disciples that both versions are true, the Hindus sanctum being first and that Baba Budan the great Mohomedan saint known as Dada Heyat Qalander, took it as his abode in later times. Dada means 'Master', Heyat means alive and Qalander means 'Perfect Master' or Sadguru of the Qalander type. Shri Baba further explained to his disciples that Qalander is a Sufi term for one who having reached perfection and having regained normal consciousness, does not follow his own religion or any other external form of religion. The Sufis would call him both Qutub and Qalander. 

Such facts of a saint not drop­ping off his mortal coil, may seem foreign to Western minds, but then do most Christians fully understand the meaning in their own religion, as for example, that the great Prophet, Elijah, was "transilated into heaven", which certainly implies that he did not die! Yet it was not these super-ordinary facts which constitute the greatest of a Saint or Prophet but that they brought regeneration to their people in their times and this spiritual influence in the lives of their people, is an historical fact, just the same as we know that a King Solomon or an Emperor Vishnuvardhana ruled in their respective times among their own people, leaving behind a material imprint called "history". 
'Spiritual history' may some day be co-ordinated when there is a Great One revealed on this earth who will synchronise all religions. The world to-day is waiting for the great Re-Uniter in the hearts and minds of humanity. Would not India, the mother of all races, be a likely place for such a One to have taken birth in order to give the spiritual impetus to our times? 

