Come and see and bear witness to Shri Baba’s perfect knowledge and understanding of all human beings. The Divine Psychologist using Divine Love as His medium of working, see how patiently He works. As there can be no perfect knowing of the True while the false ego obliterates the real "I", He must lead you towards understandingthis false ego which exists only in this world of duality. It is this awakening which gives youfreedom—freedom from bindings of convention, bindings of fear, bindings that limit and bindings that inhibit. From all these He will set you free that the Spirit within may shine forth undimmed. How?By making you conscious, first of its nature, and then at everyopportunity giving it knock after knock, till you can remain calm in the midst of all, and the false ego thus starved loses its energy till it ceases to exist. 
Shri Baba with His Infinite 
Knowedge leads you to the point where you have to face up to the truth of yourself. There is no escape in a life lived in a group, living at close quarters under one roof, bound in by four walls. Every detail of the life of each is known to the Master. For example: Some­one insults you, calls you names—calls you a liar. Immediately your ego is hurt. You boil inside, and, if this resentment is not controlled, it shows itself in anger and excitement. In this way you feed the ego, and instead of decreasing it increases. Shri Baba, who sees all, calls both parties together. He rebukes, He scolds for this lack of control and lack of love, saying: "If you cannot love each other, and it appears that you cannot, then take practical steps to see that you do not fight and can give in to one another. When you begin to feed the ego with the help of the mind and you feel resent-ment and excitement approaching, start 
ContinuefroJul193issue
laughing, start dancing, go outside for a moment till the mind is under control. But control at all costs." How slow all are to learn this lesson of control! No wonder the Master asks for implicit obedience. He knows that without this order, the struggle would be a hundred times greater. It acts as a reminder. It focusses our thought on Him and not on our action. But the closing of the scene makes even the rebuke worth while. Shri Baba, looking up and smiling,says: "Now go; forget about it and do not brood. Throw it all over. It no longer exists. Be happy, be cheerful. This is My order." (He knows how difficult it is for us to forget.) Thus we experience Divine forgiveness that truly forgives and forgets. Shri Baba may withold the fulfilment of certain statements He may make, until His own time, but if He says He forgives and forgets, you have abundant proof that this is so. 
He trusts you as before. 
There are few things that Shri Baba really dislikes, and one of these is excessive remorse and tears. If He orders you to forget and to stop brooding, you must obey and control the mind. It is lack of control that prevents your doing so. Hence Shri Baba's insistence on obedience, which is always to help you and for the. sake of the work. Says Shri Baba: "If you cannot be cheerful and obey when I tell you, then why stay near Me? You sacrifice all—your home—your friends—your freedom—for the bindings of four walls, and all this for love, yet you spoil what would be a perfect sacrifice by this ab­solutely disastrous lack of control." 
Yet another example: You come to Shri Baba never having exper­ienced what it is, say, to feel jealous. Circumstances have been such that you have had no cause to be jealous. Shri Baba, knowing the very depths and thoughts of each sees there the seed of jealousy—a past sanskara— waiting but for its opportunity for expression or sublimation. He also knows that while it remains dormant, there can be no freedom from its binding effect. What does He do? He does two things. He uses maya to overcome maya, and at the same time sublimates its energy for His own work. 
How? He knows you love Him. He knows you want to express that love in working for Him. He knows you want His love. For a time He will give you a great deal of attention, giving you many opportunities of serving Him. Then begins Shri Baba's game. He appears to pay more attention to others, to be un­conscious of your presence. He sends others on errands you have hitherto done, and gives work to another that you had begun to look on as your special job. He remarks nothing, apparently ignorant of all, when suddenly He looks up at you and says: “What is wrong? What has upset you? Are'nt you well?" You answer: “I do not know." Shri Baba. suggests any number of causes for your change of mood, and leaves you no peace until the truth is out, and you realize that perhaps it is jealousy. Jealousy or what? You want to do everything for the Beloved. The restless enthusiasm for the moment blinds, and the loving thought escapes you that it is more beautiful to stand by and let others, who love their Master equally with you and want to serve Him, have their share, yes and yours too. How happy is the Master, for His work is done. Now it is up to you to do the rest. You must go on loving more and more, but learn to control this natural—natural because our love is not perfect—feeling of jealousy. We cannot grasp that with God all are one, and that “they also serve who only stand and wait". To contro1 the outward expression of this jealousy is now your task, even if it still tor­tures the mind, and from now on it will torture like hot burning coals. Shri Baba will give you abundant opportunity to prove your efforts in this direction. He will test you almost to breaking point until you have gained the mastery over it. 
But better it is, says Shri Baba, to have these difficulties to overcome than to have nothing to control. They serve their purpose towards self-control. Is not this in itself a message of hope? Human nature changes but little until the last stage of the journey is reached. It is the control over the desire to lust, greed and anger that makes us different to the animal, and it is this control that Shri Baba asks of all who would follow Him. 
Shri Baba seldom praises. "Let your reward be," says Shri Baba," that whatever you do is done to please Me." But should He for a special reason want to show His appreciation, then He shows it; not by the spoken or spelt-out word, but silently, with a look so expressive, so full of love, the effect of which is infinitely more lasting than any words could be. 
The path towards Perfection along which Shri Baba leads His follow­ers is four-fold. Selfless action— love and devotion—mind control and Knowledge through experience combined with complete surrender­ance to the One you follow as your Master. Shri Baba says what all the Avatars before Him have said: "He that forsaketh not all that He hath, he cannot be My disciple." Only when you have given up every­thing—body, mind and wealth—for the sake of love, can you know God. 
Take attachments to possessions and wealth. There are times when love will give all unasked and at one gesture, and others there are who give by degrees. Now you have only to live near Shri Baba to realize that He needs nothing for Himself, nor does He possess anything for Himself; but to separate Shri Baba from His work is impossible. God's work is infinite, and so too His needs. How does Shri Baba help us both to give freely and at the same time to share in the work? Calling all together He will express a wish to take a long journey, others accompanying Him for His work. Who will help? Shri Baba knows quite well who can, but He says nothing. He gives those who say they love Him more than anything else the opportunity. They seldom fail. Shri Baba smiles like a happy child. Happier still is the one who gives, because love's natural expression is to give, but due to past bindings it holds back, through no fault of its own. 
On another occasion He will talk of His work with the God-mad, and how much more He could do if only He had the means. Another voice pipes out: " I could give so 
much." One more nearer the goal of parting with all for God's work for love. Let none think that money is wasted or squandered. There may be occasions when Shri Baba, to teach one who has an altogether false idea of money, will accept from him money, immediately giving it away to another, in front of the giver for what outwardly appears as encour­aging the extravagant tastes of the receiver—but not without purpose, for all that a Master does is symbolical—let none forget this— but the daily budget for the numer­ous activities of the many-sided work here and for all other works that radiate from here—these Shri Baba personally supervises, insisting on the most accurate accounts being kept of all expenditures. 
To follow Shri Baba as your Master and yet to want material security for the future has no meaning. He must be your security both now and for all times. To those who have given all He says: " You have given all for love. All mine is yours. You are My Own and I will look after all who are Mine." 
No less important on the road to Perfection is non-attachment to the result of all action of success and failure. Let all you do be to help. Says Shri Baba: "If it be your duty to kill a dog to save three cats, let your thought be that of helping the cats. Have no attachment to the action of killing." "Again, be attached to neither violence or nonviolence. Fight if fight you must, but let your motive be to help." "Eat to serve your God, but not for the pleasure of eating. So only can you learn free­dom from all desire and be attached only to love." 
"Let thy concern be the action and never the gain it may yield," says the Gita. This alone will give you the poised and balanced mind to which neither rebuke nor blame can cause any mental disturbance or bring up any anger or resentment. "Think al­ways of Me," says Shri Baba, "whatever you may be doing, and gradually it will be Me doing everything through you. 'I' the Doer—not you, so what concern have you with the result?" Shri Baba has been known to root up what has taken months to build. He started His Ashram for 
the God-mad at Rahuri, and when at its zenith, seeing those working there becoming attached to the success of it all—200 patients coming daily to the out­department—He tore the whole structure down in three days, and transported the mad by bus to new quarters here. Shri Baba builds and destroys, but all for a purpose. At every point He must test those who come to Him. We now come to the Truth underlying all Shri Meher Baba’s workings—that God alone is real, so Love only is real. Love is what Shri Baba first awakens and emphasizes continually. He asks nothing of you until you love, and the love He awakened in the writer eight years ago after only three days contact with Him in His Retreat in Devon­shire has never been quenched. It was as if a dam burst, and the years of longing for goodness, truth and beauty were at last satisfied. It takes One who is Divine Love to awaken Divine Love. As each fresh cycle approaches and human nature be­comes more receptive, fresh and higher glimpses into Divine Love are given by the Avatars to  the world, Christ taught that love of your neighbour is second only to Love of God. May it be that the Avatar of today, Shri Meher Baba, when He manifests His true being to the world, may have even a deeper meaning to give of the meaning of "Divine Love". One thing is certain, God's Love is not perfectly under­stood by man. We cannot have per­fect knowledge of Divine Love until our Knowledge is perfect; so the Avatar will always be misunder­stood. 
How does Shri Baba want you to express your love? In selfless service done cheerfully and happily. This is His first and last order. A selfless service in all external actions as well as selfless service in internal actions. This is spiritual renunciation. It is continual, unceas­ing, this struggle for self-mastery, the road to Perfect Knowledge leading to Perfect Service. “It is through work," says Shri Baba, "that you come to purity. Work dedicated all to God which frees you from responsibility and binding, and by so doing you surrender to Him whom you serve for love. This leads automatically to love for all whom you serve, because how can you hurt one whom your Master loves except you hurt Him—your Beloved, and how please Him whom you love except by pleasing those whom He loves equally with you? Love will take you still further, for would you wound your Beloved, if, by so doing, you cause another standing by, whose love may be deeper than yours, to suffer ? 
"Love suffereth long and is kind," says the writer addressing the Corinthians in Corinth. No phrase expresses more beautifully and more perfectly our Beloved Master, Shri Baba. He once said: "Do you know how I suffer from you all not under­standing Me and My Love?" How many of us say to the Master, "Give me God-Realization. Give me Union, and I will give you all I have, I want nothing else, and then I will serve you to the very end." What a crucifixion! What a sword thrust into the very heart of the Beloved to condition thus God's Love. Better that we bury our heads in the dust at the Master's feet. Let us rather be as the great Saint Rama Goa of South India. who used to cry: "Oh, God! Let me remain thy lover for ever. I do not want union, for then I cannot love you." But says Baba: "The result of this love is union. Love must naturally long for union, but it must be ever ready to give up the longing for union if it be the wish of the Beloved, and not think of self at all." 
"Love is Kind." How kind! Blessed indeed are those who have experienced Shree Baba’s Divine Kindness, treating all alike with the same loving kindness and thought­fulness. Not one manner for the rich and another for the poor, but the same loving kindness towards all, to the animal kingdom as well as to the human, to the untouchables as well as to the high castes. All are One. All are Himself in different forms of manifestation. What is our weakness? Is it not just this lack of kindness? We react so differently to each, according to whether we consider the other party to be our friend or our enemy, our acquaintance or just our hired servant. Our very tone changes, whatever our words may say. We cannot hide the real truth, that this one we love, that this one we find irritating, and another we consider our inferior. 
But see our Beloved Shree Baba. His playfulness, His gentleness, His tenderness and His kindness to the young as well as to the old, treating all who come to Him alike. Let us try to be as our Master following in His footstepts, in this aspect of Divine Love. We live with "Kind­ness" in our very midst. "Kindness'' expressed in thought, word and deed is our everyday example, and yet, in spite of it, we are still unkind. If we may ask anything of our Beloved, may it be just this, that whilst He is yet present with us, we may learn and manifest for His glory His "Divine Kindness". 
So love grows through action and through experience. Life with Shri Baba is continual action. Not for one rnoment does He allow you freedom from action—freedom from spiritual renunciation demanding energy and love of soul in contrast to feeling and emotion of the mind, often quiescent. 
Lastly, Divine Knowledge through Love. Here we come to the final stage leading to Perfection in Love. As you grow in Divine Know­ledge, there comes the opportunity to suffer with your Beloved, not necessarily physically, but may be mentally or spiritually. For example: Conditions in the world are in a chaotic state, and Shri Baba as Avatar works and suffers for the whole Universe without ceasing. At times it would seem, to those who watch, that this burden of suffering lies heavy on His brow. His mood changes. All are sitting with Him. What are the reactions of His disciples? Some resent the mood. Some, feeling they are not wanted, get up and walk out. But those who learnt something of Divine Know­ledge understand that their Master is giving them exactly what, in an outburst of enthusiasm they begged for long ago, a share in His suffer­ings. In a manner we cannot under­stand, by throwing His mood on you in this way, using you as a target, lightens His own burden. But what is the result? We fail in the test and lose control. At the end 
Shri Baba looks up with a sad smile upon His face and says: "You are not to blame; it is a phase of My universal work. I threw on you the tiniest part of My burden." Some there were present who knew what was happening and took all without argument or resentment. How happy they could feel they did not fail their Master. 
Is not love in its highest aspect, besides that of selfless service, just this capacity to share in the Divine Suffering which seems inseparable from Divine Love in its human as­pect. This is the "Divine Mystery''. The disciples served their Beloved Master from the beginning of their discipleship, but to suffer with Him came much later. The Master's remark, ''Are ye able to drink of the cup that I drink of?" implies uncer­tainty of their capacity to suffer with Him—anyway at that particular time, and in the garden of Gethsemane, when the three beloved disciples had the opportunity to share in this "Divine Mystery", they all without exception fell asleep. 
The nearest approach to complete Oneness and affinity with the Master is when He passes on in silence His Infinite suffering which will never be known or witnessed save by this lover and His Beloved. Love longs for this supreme privilege, a longing deeper than that for service, but it is not to be had for the asking! 
The Avatar must suffer. Will it be that history wil1 repeat itself, and those to deny Him, when the time comes, will be His own countrymen? 
This is an attempt to draw truth­fully and simply a picture of what all will witness if they obey the call of the Master: "Come and See." This is life. This is the truth lived in close contact with the Master. He becomes your conscience, and from this there is no escape—no relaxation. Your life is keyed up to its highest note— a note your Master pitches for you, and which you must ever try to sound with the helping hand and all-seeing eye of Him who walks ever with you, Shri Meher Baba—the Truth behind all and in all. 
"What is love?" said the Beloved. "It is that in which I die daily, and which is all my will," Ramon Lull. 
. 
