
THE quality of love is not strange. It is common to all human beings who consciously or unconsciously experience its stupendous influence through its varied expressions in life. One falls a prey to its lowest form wherein a person seeks pleasure in letting out the live current of love through channels of delusive happiness. It is short lived. Another wants to poise it on a pivot of equality and consideration and expects a return of all the love he gives. He tries to bargain love and fails to make out of it a successful commodity of happi­ness. A third one is a rare type who realizes the worth of this dynamic force to be the highest means of happiness and does not waste it on selfishness. He does not weaken it by a spirit of bargain. 
There are three kinds of love: (1) Disqualified love, (2) Qualified love and ( 3) Unqualified love. 
As strange as the title of the first type of love is, its actions are at time incredibly strange and unthinkably horrifying. It is used only to seek self-satisfaction. It does not heed the laws of nature or society. Its queer qualification is that it has fallen down from the state of purity into a state of disqualified love. It is responsible for the outrageous behaviour in the world in all the spheres of its activity—political, economical, social, educational and sex. 

It preys upon all human weakesses, physical and intellectual. 
Love which is bound down or limited by considerations is a love qualified by a sense of respons­iveness. It is subjected to the urge of retribution and fails to be love for love's sake. Where love expects a return it is given. Where it is not responded it is restrained. The transaction of give and take contributing to the happiness of lovers depend entirely on the reciprocity of their action. It is depcndent on the love returned by the beloved. It is qualified love and can thrive and develop best amongst a nation of shop-keepers and business men. Before it sells out, it has to fix up its price and a buyer alone can enjoy the fruits of 'Qualified love'. If one cannot pay the price of this love, he can have no happiness. If circumstances are unfavourable for the return of its price, one has to live in the world and lead a life unloved by the rich bargainers of love. If circum­stances are favourable, he has to be on guard to see that no act of a rich lover goes inadequately returned or he would suffer the neglect and wrath of a trader of love. 
'Unqualified love' as the name signifies is the highest form of human love, unaffected by consid­eration of appreciation or return. It proceeds from the rarefied instincts of man and thrives on the spon­taneity of its outflow. It glows only to manifest its presence with the dire satisfaction of burning itself in a service selfless, giving to those who receive and to those who deny. It is not hampered by derision or elated by laudatory. It exists independently of outside influence and has a life of its own to live. 
Every one of us experiences the urges of such love in the enlivened moments of our life. With some it lasts longer than with those it is transitory. With others it passes by leaving its perfume lingering in their hearts. To live as much longer or always in a feeling of selfless love is not entirely in our hands. But to make the best of such moments of grace is within our reach. The happy expecting of selfless love can give impetus to our selfless actions. 
