


An Experience 

BY HERR WALTER MERTENS (Zurich Switz) 

During the last days that I was with Shri Baba at Cannes, in the beginning of my medi≠tation on Baba, I saw first his different attitudes and ways of working. One moment he was near, earnest and great; at another working, smiling or speaking with his eyes and fingers on his blackboard. He had not, as I generally saw him, one special attitude, but I saw all the different aspects of his daily working. 

Then I saw how things, through his internal and exter≠nal working, had been unfold≠ed, and how all these knots of the physical, subtle and mental planes which had been mixed up in my mind for years into a strong net of maya without distinct form and without beginning or end were now directed by his gentle hands.

    I saw how he had worked on me these days, gay and light as a bird or strong as an elephant, playing or ordering, controlling or leaving me free. But now all has become clear, simple and definite. How could it ever have been anything else? How, since my childhood, could all these elements have been mixed up in my mind, bringing me and my nearest ones so many thousands of troubles and sorrows throughout all these years?

    I saw his individual and his universal game. His work is as high as the Himalayas, as deep as the ocean, as wide as the world of stars, or as small as the point of a needle. Whether one sees him as conducting an orchestra of all instruments, or as himself an instrument, or as a flower, or as any other created thing, his conscious spirit pervades everything. I saw Baba, Christ, Buddha as one, and I myself was powerful with that spirit. I was quite detached from the normal world, and, at the same time, absolutely clear and conscious of my body, and of my position in the room, and of my surroundings. I felt that His personal conscious spirit (be≠ing absolutely of Baba's 



special colour and at the same time Christ's and Buddha's) was One Golden Light consci≠ously working and pervading everything in creation. And my individual spirit became one with this divine power, was one light with Baba's Light, was conscious, seeing and realizing. I had got a glimpse of his infinite state. 

Then I had to 'come down' again. Slowly I had to reduce this universal feeling into the narrow confines of my normal state of mind. I was again like 

a turtle in his shell, a poor little creature struggling on his way in life bound by his sanskaras, trying to under-stand, to love his fellow creatures.

    But there was a great change in me; I shall never forget this experience. I had been, at the same time, a turtle and the Buddha-Christ-Baba spirit rid≠ing on the back of a turtle. I am now a 'knowing turtle' because I had a glimpse of Baba 's In≠finite State. 

