Meher Baba is not only God incarnate, but is a subject which really defies human consideration, because Meher Baba and what He represents really cannot be absorbed within the limited imaginative processes of a human being. We attempt in a frail manner to interpret Meher Baba only in terms of our ignorance which we pass off as being knowledge with a small "k". But when we consider Meher Baba, we're considering Knowledge with a capital "K", and this is beyond the knowledge with a small "k". When someone is engrossed, particularly in an endeavor which involves the toying with, the manipulation of ideas, especially as it relates to interpersonal relationships between individuals, they tend to draw Meher Baba into the limited vortex of a framework of knowledge which has nothing at all to do with Meher Baba, and what He is and how He wishes to be represented to humanity. If one is engaged in the practice of psychology, he has at his disposal hundreds and even thousands of volumes from every branch of psychology, from general psych­ology to pathologic or even industrial psychology. And as he works with these ideas and works with the ideas of Meher Baba, he begins to think of Meher Baba as a supreme psychologist, and he tries to relate Meher Baba to his particular mode of employment. Vocationally Meher Baba appears to be a psychologist par excellence. And this is quite an error, because Meher Baba is not a psychologist. He's almighty God in human form. 
Suppose a man is engaged in the reading and the teaching of philosophy, and then he turns to the works of Meher Baba and cannot surrender his works of philosophy. He begins to think of Meher Baba as a supreme philosopher. Yet Meher Baba is not a philosopher. He's almighty God in human form. 
Suppose someone is a horticulturist. As he toys around with the different methods of grafting, and modes of planting seeds, and is heavily concerned with the growth of luxuriant plant life of various forms, he begins to think of Meher Baba as the supreme horticulturist. But Meher Baba is almighty God in human form. 
He may be one of these things and yet He's all of these things. Bertrand Russell once said about philosophy that it was the no man's land in human thinking that existed between the areas of religion and science. Philosophies are simply systems that have been invented by men who have conjectured and speculated about life and have not yet arrived at a definite answer. They haven't yet gotten down to the root of life itself. Psychology, dealing with the soul or with the mind of man, again is working within the framework of reason. God is beyond reason. Because man resists God, he continually expresses in his behavior an almost absolute unwillingness to admit to himself or to others, that almighty God is the creator, the preserver and the dissolver of this whole shebang we call creation. 
That's the reason why man maintains the myth of the supremacy of what he's invented. Remember, man is not a creator. When man came into the world he found the world as it is–already complete. It's perfect. Meher Baba once said that as God He had infinite leisure. Why? Because this universe was created so perfectly that it needed no further attention from Him. It was self-operating. So man has found all this material. All the elements were already here. Man didn't create them. They were created by God. He merely discovered them. He took this material and improvised with it. All man can do is to fabricate, manufacture. He can only fashion what he already has in hand and this is not a creation any more than the different shapes and sizes and qualities of mud pie that a child plays with at the ocean's edge can be called creations. 
Greatness is found not in man, only in God. God is great. The call that the Mohammedans issue up to Allah is that God is great, God is great. And His prophet is Mohammed. Only God is great, and out of this greatness comes what? If you say it rapidly, the greatness becomes create-ness. The greatness of God is in His create-ness. Man can never have creativity. The word is wrongly appropriated. In the gross world the human mind simply has the leftovers or the gleanings of knowledge that filter down out of the universal mind of God into His creation. We're really receiving the dregs of this knowledge. Meher Baba calls this knowledge "ignorance". In other words, the knowledge of your mind, that you pick up naturally and through study, is simply ignorance about ignorance, because all that exists in Maya, which is the sole principle of ignorance, is simply a dream, a shadow. And if the mind should suddenly be projected into consciousness of the subtle planes, it has ignorance about knowledge. And if the mind should finally vault itself into the mental planes, it has knowledge of ignorance. It knows, at least as a starter, even though it exists in duality, that there is something greater yet to be known. What is greater to be known is the greatness of divine Knowledge. In divine Knowledge, the knower becomes Knowledge itself, Knowledge with a capital "K ". This is because there is only one Knowledge and this Knowledge is divine Knowledge. Only the Perfect Master, the Avatar, is equipped with this Knowledge. All a human being can ever exper-ience in the gross world is simply ignorance about ignorance and not Knowledge, irrespective of the kind of knowledge that enables him to build a space ship that can land on the moon. Just think of this universe with all of its' systems of constellations–billions of them, infinite numbers of them, that our electronic telescopes have not yet inspected, that haven't yet come into this ultra-telescopic vision–these huge bodies that are floating with mathematical exactitude through space. All a human being can do is simply launch a vehicle into space to alight on one of these bodies and then return. But all of it was created by almighty God. And the representative of almighty God in human form on this planet, is Avatar Meher Baba, who is merely a speck, a pin-speck of manifestation, which through His compassion, He has allowed us to look upon, and to feel His presence, to feel His love, to know of Him and His purpose in this advent. He has come to alert us to the truth about ourselves. 
All the limited systems of teaching that we find in the world today, through the hundreds and thousands of books, through the many thousands of universities that exist–all they can ever teach you to do is to realize your ego; to realize it more and more, and to keep you ensnared and trapped as a prisoner in this cage on this globe. But the Avatar, who is divine Knowledge itself, has come to set you free through the realization of your Real Self. These limited systems of study and teachings with their traditions, their rituals and ceremonies, can only encourage you to realize your potential within the framework of Maya, or ignorance. But almighty God in the person of Meher Baba, has come to set you free through a realization of your ultimate destiny, and that is Godhood itself. 
Very few will be set free from the tentacles of the gross world to find themselves in their divine hallucinatory state of the subtle planes. Very very few will reach the divine nightmare of the mental planes. But only a rare one, Meher Baba says, reaches the plane of God consciousness, although it is available to all and it is not a fairy tale. It's an absolute truth. It's a fact. In order to receive this gift–and it is a gift, a rare gift from God–you must love Him and not yourself. You must love Him. Meher Baba says that if you could love Him so intensely and so completely, so utterly without thought for yourself, even for a second–it has to be that total, that complete–you would disappear from the face of the earth, and you would know not only Him but your Real Self, and you would become what you always are. This is what it's all about. 
There isn't a generation gap, but a separation gap that exists in the world today. We feel separate from ourselves because we are separate from the Real Self. It is this separation that creates the confusion, the conflict, the indeterminate way in which we act, the misunderstandings, the miscomprehension, all the little things that disturb us. We do not know that what we are really opposing is separateness from our Real Selves. Meher Baba has come to interpose Himself between this little self 
and the Real Self, and He says, grab hold of My Damaan He's come to lead you into the reality of the Real Self. In order to do that you've got to break with tradition. It isn't a traditional mind that can grasp hold of Meher Baba. Shortly before Meher Baba came to America in 1952, He had a pit dug in back of the Manonash Cabin that we find on the border of the Mandali Campus in Meherazad. This deep pit was dug so He could light a duhni fire. He said the fire that day in the duhni represented the annihilation, the end, of all rituals and ceremonies in the religions of the world. This was the end and He bade the Mandali collect all specks of ash from the duhni and place them within two jars. These jars remain on a shelf in one of the cabins in Meherazad to this day. They haven't been touched since. And this is why when Meher Baba has come into the world today. He's shaken up the whole world. He's turned it upside down. He's made it topsy-turvy. 
    I like to think not of humanity, but of youth-anity. Youth is the one that is to receive Meher Baba's gift of love, because it is youth that naturally tends to champ at the bit of tradition and wants to snap the connecting link with it. It wants to have something ever fresh, ever new, ever greater. Youth tends to have a vision which somehow has been lost to the minds of the older generation, who tend to sink back in complacency and smugness upon what they have gained and gathered to themselves. Youth must be heard and it must have it out. Today's youth particularly, is equipped with the kind of mentality that can receive everything that Meher Baba has come to give to the world. It is His generation, Meher Baba says, and these youngsters can absorb and comprehend this divine message of Love and Truth, while their elders find it very difficult to understand it. Think of it. God in human form has come to set mankind free. It's a fact. The youth of the land, when they read His work, come to get this feeling. They know it rings true inside. It gives them a happy wonderful feeling. But the older generation fails to hear this ringing. The divine call is not heard by the older generation but it is heard by the new. The young people are the generation of Meher Baba, and they are equip­ped to hear this divine call–it's ringing–and they've got the ears to hear. This is the reason why when they look at a photograph or a movie of Meher Baba, it catches them inside, it holds their interest, their attention, but most of all, it takes hold of that heart, and Meher Baba is for the heart of humanity–especially the heart of youth-anity. They don't always know the answers, they don't know why, but they know Meher Baba belongs to them. It's as though He's their property. 
Now Meher Baba is God Almighty. He is the eternal Parent. That's why they flock to Him. Those who are parents get the idea that children belong to them, but they don't–they belong to God. This is His creation. Souls from the Universal Body of God are spewed into forms. They are to do the work of the Avatar. Everything that happens in this creation happens because of the prearranged planning of the Avatar, even as it has come out of His original whim to know Himself–from the question of who am I? to the answer I am God. And this question must be answered in the mind and heart of every soul that is delegated to find its Self and come home to reality through the form and person of Meher Baba." Parents are given children to help them to maturity. They become mature in the rearing of children. They learn about self sacrifice, caring, giving up of time, energy and money. They become con­cerned about the helplessness of a child who is not yet ready to take care of himself. It is this consideration, and attention that formulates a wonderful maturity in the adult. In fact it makes adults out of kids when they have kids. It's a wonderful gift, a wonderful boon that God has given us. But you see, they want to hold onto these kids forever and they can't. These kids are leased to them temporarily. Animals have the healthy instinct. When the pup reaches a certain age, the mother hound forces it to leave her care. She shoos it out into the world to take care of itself Birds do this also. They jounce the nest up and down and compel the little birdlings to get out and fly and to take care of themselves. By instinct, the lower subhuman forms of life know that God not only motivates them, but takes continuous care of them and supplies them always with their needs. It's a wonderful instinct that the subhuman creatures have, but this instinct has been lost to man. We want to hold onto our fledglings until the very day we expire. But please remember, God is our eternal parent. He is both father and mother and we belong to Him because He created us. Birth is simply an event in the interminable life of the soul that is taking form after form after form, until it reaches its ultimate destiny, which is the consciousness of Godhood itself. We are not in this world to be children of parents, and we are not in this world for parents to keep their children ever as children. We must all reach that level of maturity where we begin to ask ourselves that wonderful emancipatory question, "who am I?" and begin to search inside ourselves to get that wonderful, eternal and right answer, "I am God." This is what life on this planet is about. He is the eternal answer. We have but to accept it. 
Above all He has given to mature individuals His love. Only a mature person can love. Only one who is mature knows the responsibilities and obligations that go with love. And He's made Himself so loving, so compassionate, so wonderfully unique a parent, that we want always to please Him. And one day, when He has a mere whim, a mere wish, He will make one amongst us a rare one, like Himself. This is what the striving is about–to become one with God and be ever free from all of the ologies created by man, that have only one purpose, to keep us in prison within the confines of a cage we call this earth. He has come to set us free; not to give us more and more knowledge, which is ignorance, but to give us freedom through divine Knowledge. You cannot go into the religions of the past to find this, because to do this you'll have to plow through a husk of dogma, and ritual and ceremony which have nothing to do with God, but which are merely the expressed machinations of the minds of misguided, ego filled men. He has come to give the message 

simply and straight. Before this century is over, if we don't accept the message as it is given by Meher Baba, while it is still pure and unadulterated, those who are not equipped to give the message will begin to suck Meher Baba into a confused whirlpool of all manner of "ologies" that have nothing to do with Truth. You can never get with reason that which is beyond reason. The mind cannot get that which is beyond mind and still retain itself as mind. The mind in which the ego resides, must be destroyed. Only its annih­ilation can give us the God mind which is mind­lessness–which is Knowledge itself, where you be­come the knower of all pervading Truth. You become Knowledge itself. 
The Parvardigar prayer that you heard tonight means that when you take hold of the Damaan of Meher Baba, you can become the attributes of that prayer. But the commitment must be total, whole­hearted, absolutely complete. To give yourself in this one pointed, concentrated completeness to Meher Baba, takes discipline–great discipline, and great dedication. It has been said that there is no authority in the world concerning the truth that has been es­poused by Meher Baba. This would presuppose that the Intimate Mandali of the Avatar are all dead. The Intimate Mandali of the Avatar are His Apostles, and the· ones that are living are His living Apostles. They are left to blow the trumpet, giving out to the world, the greatness of their Divine Master, the Spiritual Awake­ner of this age. If it were not for the Intimate Mandali, how would the world know of the greatness of the Avatar? They are the authorities that have been left behind by Meher Baba. Those who are the ten, twenty, and thirty minute or ten day acquaintanceship wonders, who have sat in the presence of Meher Baba, when He was in the body, feel the inadequacy of their contact. They feel they have very little to munch on because what Meher Baba has left is but a handful of works. These twenty minute wonders can cull through hundreds of thousands of volumes about ignorance. That's what they can always talk about because their minds are well oiled and greased by the things that are in these pages about ignorance. But even if you cull the works of Meher Baba, it is only a superficial treatment of Truth. In order to know about this Truth, one has literally to sit at the feet of the Avatar. As you're sitting there for hours, and days, and weeks, and months and years, He communicates something to His Intimate Mandali that is not commun­icated to anyone else. There are so many things that an Avatar does in His actions that are not understood, even as His words are not understood. Just think of a prasad of a lozenge in the mouth of the Avatar, and 
Published monthly 
then His taking it from His mouth and 
mouth of an Intimate Mandali. We don't k or the intention that goes with this prasad, this gift of God. What of sharing a cup of tea with the Avatar, from his lips, or sharing a glass of coconut milk, or fruit juice, or being handed directly a prasad of mango, which Baba called the king of the fruit? We hardly know what is behind the actions of the Avatar. But when an Avatar says specifically to an Intimate Mandali, you are My Apostle, He's designated him as His official trumpeter, to trumpet out the call for the Avatar. Upon this Mandali He places His glance. His eye is always on the Mandali, and those who hear the message from the Intimate Mandali, feel the presence of Meher Baba. They feel His presence, and the Intimate Mandali have nothing to do with this at all, because Meher Baba is doing all the work. He is capturing the heart, and all an Apostle can do is simply capture the attention of the listener while Meher Baba silently does His work with the heart of the listener. The Intimate Mandali are His authorities, and once they're gone, the rituals, the cere-monies, the perversions, are going to enter all of the messages and declarations and the works of Meher Baba. 
While the message is simple, the actual application of it is difficult because we are living in a world of duality and the primary note of duality is division. Until we cease being divided within ourselves, we cannot concentrate with single-mindedness of purpose upon this love of Meher Baba. We must feel this love. This is the magnet that will draw you towards Infinity. Baba says you are that Infinite One, but it is asleep in you. Meher Baba's love constitutes the spark that will stir it into wakefulness, and when it rises up, it will take hold of the limited self and through the heart it will shatter and smash this ego forever. When this mind is smashed and done with, the You with a capital "Y" which always knew itself as God but until this moment was unconscious of it, suddenly be-comes aware and completely conscious of itself as being the One Soul. Maya disappears. The world is gone. Imagi-nation is gone, and you become Divine Knowledge–the Knower and Master of everything that is knowable. Only youth has the audacity to accept this almost preposterous truth. In fact, it is a preposterous gauntlet that is laid down by the Avatar. Only youth can grasp it, take it to its heart and say, we'll give it a tum. So you've got to tum it on, and then you've got to tum it in, and then, after you've turned it in, you'll be turned out into the Divine State of Godhood, and you become what you always were, always are and forever will be. 
