HOLY SAINTS IT is only those who are on the Path that know the efficiency of Holy Men's foot-dust. It is said that the cure for the God-afflicted souls is the dust of Saints' feet. One of Nanjiyar's disciples said that the Cause of the affliction— Lord Sri Krishna, Whose absence is the Cause—must be the cure, the Sovereign Salve, the reply was this: When people are delirious of God we cannot easily give them butter-milk to drink. We, as first-aid, apply ginger-powder to their nostrils. When butter-milk (the Lord) therefore is not readily available, Saints' feet-dust is the first-aid remedy. This is the surest way for Self-realization. 
A great spiritual writer says, "The very touch, the very sight, the very hem of the garment, the very shadow and even relics of Holy Men, have been recorded as efficacious." 
The Perfect Saint may make the Love in us as ‘strong as death’. And this "Divine Love is sometimes so violent, that it actually separates the soul from the body, and by causing the death of those who love, it renders them infinitely happier than if it bestowed on them a thousand lives." (St. Francis de Sales in his “Love of God”.) This secret explains a wonderful spiritual phenomenon. An earnest student put me very reverentially this question: "You say your Master can do wonderful things. Why do some of His bhaktas (disciples) die under His very nose? The above statement is a clear answer to the question. It is this answer that will clearly explain the 'death' (as we generally call the event) of dear ‘Nonny’ (Mrs. Estelle Gayley), who, in the words of Shri Baba, was one of His greatest lovers. St. Francis de Sales in another place says, "There are 

persons, who by yielding without reserve to the influence of Divine Love, augment its ardour to such a degree, that in the end it entirely consumes them. These ardent lovers of the Almighty are like persons enduring some weighty affliction; the excess grief sometimes deprives them for so long a time of food and sleep, that they are reduced to extreme debility, which soon leads to death.'' Everyone in the world dies but this ‘death’ is the gateway to Moksha (Liberation). 
Tiruk-Kanna-Mangai-Andan was a great Saint who resigned himself entirely to God. His disciple, seeing his ecstatic condition, told him, "What can I do after your demise?'' The great Master said, ''Son, it is enough for you if you only remain by my side." It is said, “The disciple carried out this command to the very letter and expiring even before the Master, mounted to the Abode of the Blessed." This beautiful and instructive incident teaches us four important truths: 
1. 	
The earnest disciple should have faith in his Master. 

2. 	
The disciple should try to completely conquer the “I­ness” in him. 


3. 	
Then the act of acceptance of him by the Master will produce the desired result. 

4. 	
The disciple, dying in the presence of the Master, has his final Liberation. 


This is the meaning of the observation of Thomas A'Kempis when he said, "Blessed the man who continually anticipates the hour of his death," (the hour of his final Liberation), and adds, "and keeps himself in continual preparation for its approach" (this means that he should resign himself to the will of God through a Perfect Master). 
There is a beautiful letter of Rev. S. Rutherford in which he says, ''Faith's eyes, that can see through a millstone, can see through a gloom of God, and under it read God's thoughts of love and peace." This is the meaning of the cryptic quotation, "Go out into the darkness and put your hand into the hand of God. That shall be to you better than light", of the poem of Miss M. C. Haskings in the recent Christmas Day Message of the King-Emperor. That is why it is stated in the Bhagavad Gita, "The wise grieve neither for the living nor the dead" (2. 11), and that the so-called 

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
'death' is only a means of casting off worn-out clothes (2. 22). 
This secret is very difficult to understand, and Shri Baba tells us what to do: "Maya is too powerful to allow your mind to be attracted by anything else. But with the Grace of a real Saint or a Perfect Master you can turn your eyes away from it and towards Paramatman." The Master’s acceptance of us effaces our ''I­ness," and this is the only road to Self-realization. 

