

 
duty as well as the others living  in the Manzil. But when he stuck to the huge fire-­‐places amidst the heat in Bombay to the end, for nearly one year, in spite of being the oldest member amongst the group which was mainly composed of young men, it can be said that he did the duty to the extent of devotion. Since he also succeeded in satisfying the different and varied tastes and evoked constant appreciation from one and all, that showed  that the work was carried out by him with a sense of love and regard for those whom he served so well.
The fact that entitles him to these lines was the double "fire" that he had had to face during  this period. The fire he cooked on paled into insignificance against the constant "fire" of a personal day and night supervision from Baba who always insisted that  the food prepared had  necessarily to be fresh for each meal, it had to be sufficient enough to satisfy the ever fluctuating appetites of the inmates to the full, and at the same time it was not to  exceed the actual requirements
 
and result in surplus.
Compared with R. M., S. K. provided a distinct contrast. S. K. was probably the youngest  member in the group and possibly the most care-­‐free. He had just completed his  school career and was due to join a college. But, instead  of  that,  he was ordered to serve as an apprentice in an automobile workshop. Although he did not know at the time that this would lead him in the future to build an excellent automobile organiza-­‐ tion of his own, he dabbled cheerfully in oil and grease,  and  did not mind making a mess of himself under motor cars under repairs. Naturally inclined to  live in the "present" and not interested in the deeper ques-­‐ tions of life and its consequences, he was also apparently left much alone by Baba, and thus the life in the Manzil for him was compar-­‐ atively tame excepting for the special order that he was not to speak with and meet friends and relations outside  the  premises. This simple  little  rule  soon  proved for him to be a big task to perform.
One evening, a previous school chum happened to come
 

 
across S. K. in a railway train. Naturally the friend greeted him very warmly, but it was enough to freeze S. K. who remembered the order and acted accordingly by avoiding a  mutual recognition. For a while the friend was silenced, perhaps thinking that he had made a mistake and that it was only a case of a remarkable resemblance. But since under such circumstances even a stranger is apt to respond in one way or the other, the friend could not help closely watching S. K. who had necessarily to avoid speaking to or looking  squarely in the face of his friend. Within a few minutes quite a scene was created in the railway compartment. To the amazement of the other fellow passengers the friend burst into a sudden appeal, "I am sure you are the same S. K., but what is the matter with you, old chap? Why don't you speak with me? S. K., you must recognize me, we were together in the school …" Fortunately the train soon reached the destination, and S. K. literally flew out of the carriage at the first possible opportunity, leaving the poor friend under the
 

impression   that   he   had    gone
stark mad !
R. A. was one of the married members in the group, and as such he was occasionally allowed to contact and  communicate with his family members in the moffusil. Once he received information that his  only  son was laid ill at home and that he remembered him too much. Knowing that his wife  was  also in a delicate state of health at  that time, R. A. became all the more anxious when he did not  get further news for days together. He was naturally looking forward to the permission to go home, and felt averse to take part in the usual evening recreations. He used to return to the Manzil in a listless frame of mind after finishing the day's work. That particular evening a new game of marbles was being played on the Manzil playground under brilliant electric lights specially arranged for the occasion, and everyone appeared to be enthusiastically absorbed in the game. R.A.  turned up as usual by 7 p. m. and appeared unusually grave in the gay atmosphere.
While reporting to Baba on
 
return to the Manzil within the specified hour in the  evening,  as a rule everyone met with a cheerful response. R. A. found Baba as usual in a cheerful mood watching the newly introduced game with great interest. But he got a mild shock when Baba became grave on seeing him. Without the expected word or gesture of  cheer,  Baba turned to
D. G. and asked, "Shall we tell  him now? " D. G. replied in an equally serious tone that it was better to disclose the news after dinner. Following a pause of  deep suspense, once again Baba addressed D. G., "I think  better let him know about the telegram now," and without waiting for an answer from D. G., R. A. was told point black that his son had passed away. Before R. A. could hardly recover from the shock,  he was immediately ordered to join the game and play marbles.
For a moment R. A. was too dazed even to move, but he was fortunate enough to obey the command forthwith. With the electric lights swimming before his eyes and the players appearing to be shadows in a horrible nightmare, R. A.
 
joined the field and mechanically began to handle the marbles. As soon as he carried out the instructions, he  was  recalled, and the fateful telegram was handed over to him to read. The message read that R. A. had another son and that all was well with his family!
The  special instruction for  A.
K. was to have no connectio or communication  of  any   kind under any circumstances with three certain members in the  group without there being any apparent reason at all for this unique restriction. But  all  the same the instruction had to be carried out to the letter without giving offence to the parties concerned and without adopting any outward sign in connection with this injunction. Conse-­‐ quently A. K. had necessarily to  mix with equal freedom with all those who  lived  in  the  Manzil  and at the same time maintain just that hair-­‐breadth distance from the three persons concern-­‐ ed.
In effect this order not only meant for A. K. a question of physical restraint, but it also naturally proved to be  a  source of mental discipline
 
when  carried  out  with  mechanical precision.
For B. F. it was a life of  complete renunciation. He had to dispose of all his various businesses  lock,  stock   and barrel, and join the Manzil with just clothes and personal belong-­‐ ings.
While R. K. provided another contrast, inasmuch as he got engaged to marry during his stay in the Manzil.
In spite of the same one collective life led in the Manzil, if all those who lived there
 
experiences, the Manzil-­‐e-­‐Meem would just appear to have been a stage on which each individual played an entirely different role from the other, simply  because they all believed in Baba and his two  great  Masters,  Hazrat Babajan of  Poona  and  Shri  Upasni Maharaj of Sakori, both of whom gave but one prophetic injunction,  "Follow  Merwan,  do as he says, the time will  come when he will make the world  dance  to  his tune."
