


Shri Meher Baba 

IMPRESSIONS* 
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 


We may complain, feel lone-some, want more love, more appreciation; we miss recognition, we dread criticism, we lack humour and cannot bear to be laughed at; we then call on Him for pure understanding. We speak to Him openly from the heart in the straight personal way that we cannot disguise when confronted be-fore Him...He will answer : " I am in everyone. When they laugh at you it is I who laugh at you. See me in everyone. Bear it for the love of me. See me alive in all and everyone as the act in reaction that has to per≠form in you the creation plan in Being. In all in life, the pure, the good, the false, the non-important fact is me. See me as the important order in anyone to sow in reaction the real pure opposition, and that is in Being. To you, life is martyrdom in reaction. In reality life is pure winning order in opposition as experience. Everyone in  is use of my life in true, pure opposing order. Take it lightlyóbe realóbe calmóand react only in me. I am the pure One in you." What He saysó fulfils. 

    Sometimes when the pure Vision becomes obscured by thoughts, desires, wants, and we lose lightness in mood, never will He touch at the ordeal's problem. Like the sun behind the clouds will He rise above and project the warm light and transform the dull show of our individuality into pure state of stupefaction of Love, Joy, Bliss! 

His whole life in expansion in Divine Love is impersonal sharing indivisible communion with usólifeóhuman creature ólife as natureólife as Being. Life is practical. Life is use. The divine mutual good is the constant use. He never wastes. 

He is clever, sagacious, astute quick in response, playing 

* Continued from January 1939 issue. 



with anyone's ideas, humorously toler≠ant with our dual speculative experi≠ment in thoughts, the unconsciously prepared thoughts. He can avoid be≠forehand to save us from doing a wrong deed. He often stages confusion, call it trial, call it quest; winning in the game He reveals the impersonal state within; we experience non-attachment to self-satisfaction. He plays games with us making us invent situations. He then lures our soul-driven imagination. When He laughs with the sad child of this world He liberates it from the attachment to pain. 

Life is mind and in mind He reigns unselfish pure. He is control of life in every order in mind. He can do in 'ways unseen' what no ordinary man can. He is in life a man executive, impersonal, simple, so natural that for the old fashioned conventional orthodox in mind who can conceive Divinity only through the masquerade of rituals and the practice of austerity. He appears too human. Expressing through art, through science, through any work of mind, through life in spirit, He is the un≠conditional pure work of Truth that stirs, that performs the awakening. Life is the instrument through which He works, reacting in it He fulfils the ideal form that is the real 'human being'. 

Once He said, while sojourning in the West: "For you, children of America, when my time has come, I shall perform the Grace of God-realization to one of your lowest types in consciousness, a criminal. " He can make gods out of mud. "Do not fear, " He says, "Depend on me. " We need Him always. 

Once a friend near suicide calls to Him in despair. At that time she was in America and Baba was in India. She put her heart's anguish into a letter addressed to Him. But before the letter was closed, the inner wide space opens and within her deep confusion she sees His calm eyes appear. The passing quest is cleared. Calm and confidence in life is re-established. He says: "I am in you, with you always; in you I work, and out of you, I do the work in will, and life in energy. When you in me resign, I in you can operate free. When you in me give-in, I in you outwardly and inwardly free, the 



rude, crude show of you, the 'I' and create you like me. I can in you prevent the fall and I can in you render immune the want. I am in the All One Pure Work that can what no man can. I am InfiniteóI am Truth."

    Although suffering in the delusion of the false show in Maya, we can within the pure 'indivisible self ' as intuition, know, see, feel, the happy design. We may call it unfathomable joy, love unselfish, pure faith. We need not name it at all. When we see in Being in joy we are the form in Being as in joy, in faith, in love. We have become the new human being that is resigned to the delusion of self-experience and to the impure show of imagination. We are made conscious to be within pure good, unselfish, real, natural and at peace with everything. 

In 1937 Baba established an Ashram for the Western group at Nasik. It was a passing phase. Here, in luxury and great comfort, He taught us detachment from the want to self-indulge in individual whims and desires. Baba be≠gins by giving all and ends by taking 

all. He gave, in the Ashram in Nasik, full right to the individual 's self-satis≠faction. Through the exchange in con≠sciousness we realized the deeper meaning of that order in training. He made us understand that in the divine scheme in life, Truth in disguise in whim and wish and selfish will and low selfish desire, does the out in-going order to win to control to over-come through pure unconditional want. 

As truth Being in disguise, He lured us deeper into the dual strife, exposing us to more struggle, to more opposition, till we realized the reaction of love in the deep show in mind in Being as our spirit existence where He, within, in our life impersonal, does the stir that furthers our deeper understanding, our spiritual advancement. We realized that pure benefit and accepted the quest free. We know that we would become one in the strife, one with the adversity, one with life in opposition. 

We were a group of different types, of different race and character also different as types in consciousness. The deeper understanding freed us from prejudice; we learned to be 



tolerant and to accept the differences. He gave us the strength to live up to the spiritual viewpoint which is impartial. 

When this phase had fulfilled its results, He again closed the Ashram in Nasik. He exchanged the external field of activities by ordering most of the members of the group to go back to their old life and to practise in life what they had been able to realize. 

The 'second Ashram' which Baba calls simple is in "Meherabad". This place is indeed holy for its memories of purer suffering and deep spiritual en≠durance. It is the place of perfect Re≠nunciation. Here life has been given without bargain and without resistance to the impersonal scope. Hero men and women of tender age, and men and women of mature experience of life have donated the full price of life to the Beloved. They have lived in real detachment from any order in attach≠ment for many years, till they have achieved the last phase which is detachment from non-attachment. Baba says of these staunch bearers of his life: "To them I am father, mother, child. 

They know me. Within they do realize my life as Truth that works the liber≠ation of their mind, body and spirit. They give me themselves, to use through themselves the Creation plan for Truth. They surrender without pride their individual modes of life. Their own divine existence is my own life. I ripen the fruit of their life 's labour. In feeling within joy, they own me. In spending life in self-sacrifice, they realize me. They give me what I owe in them. " 

We who have come from afar in distant strife in lonesome longing search to find the way to realize life divine, bow to this wonderful result in fulfilment. 

    To all He says: "Give me you and I will make you the wonderful 'I'." 

The unfathomable exchange, the transmutation act, He operates in us unconscious, and with us the surren≠dering individual. He says: "Be the human individual that you have to be, and I shall in me consume your sin, your weakness." The annihilation act in our own ego's work He consumes to fulfilment. When 



we understand that bad is sin, we understood that good has to replace had. When we realize in Him, Truth, then will be revealed to us the balance of good and bad. 

When we denunciate the low in creation we denunciate Jesus. When we denunciate sin in our neighbour we denunciate Jesus the same Perfect One as Him, our Beloved Shri Meher Baba. When we, in our own selves, puzzle, worry, we misuse in false speculations in mind  God's work. We then create false witnesses, but through Love we shall understand. To confirm this new understanding He says: "Have I not been in you the alive, impure, pure impulse since the dawn of creation? Have I not been in you the unfolding understanding? Tolerance is the new impersonal understanding when you in me, the Son of God, resign. " To surrender in Him means to recognize in Him the Divine Theme as our own individual life's theme. 

To be in Him free, unbound, im≠

mune, we grow, live, and die to live 

Eternally. 


