The life of this great Saint will beinteresting and instructive. He was born in Uraiyur and his parents werePanars (the lowest caste, the Panchamas). He was, therefore, named 'I'iruppan-Azhvar. "Not status in society but Divine wisdom and spiritual illumination mark the saints." Who has not read in Southern India the life of the great Pariah Saint Nanda? Ifonly our people calmly read the livesof the Pariah saints, they would notfoolishly oppose the entry of Panchamas into the temples. 
The heaven-born child was intoxicated with the love of God. As he grew up, his love increased. He saton the banks of the Kaveri quite wraptin Divine contemplation. One dayLoka-Saranga Maha Muni came thereto fetch water, 
. 

but he would not approach the "Pariah". He took a pebble and threwat the lifeless statue-like Saint. It hurt him and caused a wound. Then this Pariah Saint rose and stood at a distance. Saranga then went and took water to the temple. It is said that Godappeared in his dream, and chastisinghim said, "Tiru-ppannar is not a Pariah. He is my soul. He is my infinite and confidential friend. Lift him on your shoulders and bring himinto the temple." He ran, fell on thefeet of the "Pariah" Saint, and with his consent carried him to the temple. There the Saint sang his beautiful Amaaln-Adipiran on the only God, and became identified with Him in his fiftieth year.Blessed be the Saint 'I'iru-ppani Azhvar. 

Ajmer Memories 
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 
Shri Meher Baba Says : "Them, who win in Self-divine joy to surrender to Me, win in Me. To winin Me is to realize God. To see in Me God as self-state in Intuition divine, Iwin in Self-State divine. The attainment of life in eternal Bliss, is Gift of God in Person as mind infinite in form as Human." 
Baba referring to the agent on the6th plane states further: "Seeing,know-ing, feeling is a passing phase, as is his. He has still to climb to Me the I imperishable. The soul has noexpi-ation to endure. In the state inSelf-use impersonal as the Light ofGod, he being in it impersonal is stillbound to Light-enjoyment. He is dazed, he is submerged and not above. So he has to wait for Grace. I shall give him the Grace, and it willbe when I realize in it—him as Me as One. These men who were brought toMe by my workers, came because Ihave drawn them to Me here in my home, to forego in my own alive Presence—the last phase. I shall leave them here in charge of highposition that no one will ever see ordiscover. They are my own working agents whose life I here establish toserve as divine life, to use all as it is,for use to Me, I, God. So this man hasto realize Me, as I have to realize Mein him. We in one only love-motion expiate in 'I' divine our own mind. He is in Me the I infinite and in him the I, indivisible pure, real. He has to realize Me, and so do I in him expandin dream state of Life in God. He in self-deluded state in seeing God in Me—is in Me Life that is real good to be use, as in it I conscious do realize Me. 
He has to serve Me as any one has,who is real, good, unselfish. The Majzub in the sixth plane is rare andwins in Me when in him I appear ashuman, as Person. He knows Me and sees Me as Light. Both these souls seeMe and realize Me as the One, the 
*ContinuefroJul193issue 

Light divine in person, as man in state infinite, as conscious realization in Being as them portion of the divine One-All-I. Life One, is still in them in portion state. 
The other one of the two agents is a spiritual type different from the first above mentioned. He is different in as much that he is more indifferent to the state infinite, but in the life as human, he is a real man who is fully conscious of the gross plane of consciousness. He sees Me wash himself and do service to him, and his own reaction is worship. When this one appeared, I saw in him good and bad in riot; this is a different order of Self in use in the mind infinite. He is so far in his advancing progression, that he is real selfless use of the divine mind. 
All the advancing souls are indirect in Me the use of Me in life, as stirring atmosphere as Joy and as life that is progressing. These men of Ajmer, I shall see to bring in soon as life real good. I shall do as I do to all—awaken. 
It is fact, and it is reverence in them of Me, to all in Me as life, that I have to realize them 
who win in Me in desire to live in Me free—free as Me. So, I conscious help all who in Me—win. These men, whose I as state conscious is real, I win in Me to serve Me here, since I am descended to serve. I do help and serve in self use of Me as human. This is the difference of Me-God and of Me-human. I am serving these men and all men—as human. To do it I serve, I wash, act and react. I realize in conscious expansion in I infinite, and in finite conscience. I do stir the Self-act in Being of use to the I in expiation in good in bad. 
If one is in mind, in all, im­personal or disassociated from the self-experience, the life in mind in the finite is of use of Cause in direct way. To see this, I do refer to the fact of these my working agents who at all hours in day or night show the real desire to serve Me. That is to serve in the I as superficial I, as it is in the One-I an order in them to see, to be at the disposal of My external or internal call. These men owe to be the stronger ordering mind readers, and suconscious Knower; they sow the Cause in being Love 
directed by the divine expansion. These I do govern in all the scale in consciousness. I, in them the substance divine, in them in direct intuition, do it unseen. The fact that they were here in My own presence is the mysterious part to all who know so little of the working of the divine mind. The divine mind works in differences. The mind in the state finite is too much occupied with the self reaction, and as it creates individual reaction it is accum­ulating the rubbish that in the mind infinite has to be reacted in self-use unselfish of the life unselfish. To say it once more in your individual language, it is the act in reaction in the life of mind in the I finite, that is to react, to execute the expiation, that has to be divine surrender; that is, one is in the strife the expiating Self, or I, or sub-conscious life in expia­tion, or the mind infinite in self-use for use impersonal, or the duo-reaction in the whole universe. This, the realization expiation in mind in the infinite I, in these in the sixth plane do react indirectly as Cause; be it as it is, they do the divine will's order in the reactionless state 
in which they see the divine Light. Thus they do the duty of the life indivisible in the state of Majzub. This direct order in the state of a Majzub is to call in them to order the last phase. 
To see in the ’I’ in the mind infinite the Light, is to them too new to be reacted, as in it they still seem to enjoy the divine Life in pure rest as such it is. The divine pure rest is a danger in all who in the rest see Me as Light. It is rapture in mind infinite and it is life in reactionless state in these Selves in the finite expansion in consciousness. So I do it to help them on. 
They were called in the way indirect by the order in the 'I' infinite and in the order in the way external through my own disciples. These men of my mandali I have trained to see in the intuition, as you in the intuition hear my direct order. They do it accurately, as it is to serve my work that they do it; as they are so indivisibly linked to Me, the direct intuition call is through them my own disciples. That is why I do order in all strictest discipline in obedience as in every hour of day and night I do 
work in direct and indirect way. 
These two agents here in Ajmer owe to serve Me in Being as divine use. They serve as the antennas in the spiritual world in these regions in India. This is to be a fact recognized after I have spoken the divine order of the New dispen­sation. These people I do love as I love other human expiating mind as Me in use in them. They owe Me as I do owe in them to be divine 'I' as use divine. These men I observe from afar, and dictate from afar, and operate from afar. These men I do react from afar, and they owe no more to know it. 
They live to live for Me in them, and no more for themselves in themselves. I in them am one, I, Truth, God. See me give Love to the pure in heart, the anguished in self-state divine: those in anguish in hunger impersonal to use them­selves impersonal for use of my One-in-I-Life that is divine. See them conscious revere Me, begging in Me for Love while destitute, and humble, and hungry for food. See them offer their whole existence, all life in self-design to use themselves for use of Me. 
All I here try to expand in them, during these hours in deep spiritual work on this tour through India which you all personally witness, is Self-use in them of Truth. It is use in Me of them in selfless experience of Truth. All I do here is selfless use of Me in them. See it. Give it as demonstration of Me to the world in these few pages, as I do give you the right to do it. See this as fact of Love to the world. 
I here say to the world, come all who are heavy-laiden, I will free ye of the burden of pain of suffering. See Me do it. See Me practise it. This is what I wish to give to the world as My advice through them who love Me. See in this Me, One, the God's Love in desire to help. I win in all in men the mind that is pain, wrath, revenge in war as life misused in vengence whether by the word in slander or through the use of the knife or weapon. I will resurrect in Love. All I will desire in Love to obey Truth, One—‘I’— God—Me as His son, as His emissary humble and selfless, human as man that conscious in all is Compassion." 
This here see and say to all; Shri Meher Baba is here— compassionate in mind in all to do good. He is here to solve in love pure, Life Real. He is here to use impersonal Truth to manifest Truth real as life as experience of Truth. More than it has ever been given before, it will be good to see life resurrect from the ardent desire to destroy Life Real. Shri Baba says: "All here is life impure in destruction. See in it you, he, she, all of you destroy to see Me new arise in you. 

These holy men, you have seen alive arise in Me in joy and bliss; to seduce in them the Christ's use—I here design free. In you human who is bound in life infinite in Me, I use the use in finite experience. 
When men do inquire why I do wash the destitute, for what use, you may answer: Shri Meher Baba is living compassion in all his own actions in life in practice of Him divine, He is human to use himself as simple real compassion to demon­strate what we must know to be good, to be real to act in life as spiritual human striver. We do not always need to practise austerity; we none else than ought to, practise good, doing good in selfless 
motive. We ought to be as He is. It is real and simple, and it is good and none else than simple as He is divine. To be divine is to be good. To be good is to be divine. So it is." 
Later Baba explained to me about the Voice as super-conscious clear audience in a subject who is still in finite bindings. He stated: "The voice which I allow to resound in Word in thought, is not an ordinary phenomena as clear audience; it is an experience in finite I of you who is infinite in I as old strife. To men in general it is phenomena, but it is real expansion in reaction in finite experience of the One-I, as One infinite in portion in a human striver who is connected in my own work since the beginning of life in finite strife. It is no more than an earning in I, that has still to expiate in the I as human, till I in it resign the strife. The well-earned reward in strife is life in suffering in love, in physical ailment and in spirit for the One-I existence. It is important to say this to men in general as the 'Voice' is too often misunderstood as physical phenomena. 
It is very difficult to realize Me, as it is difficult to bring in 
the whole of the ‘One-in-I' exist­ence. To know Me, is to realize the divine reaction in all in life as the show in resurrection". 
The divine apparition of Shri Meher Baba here now is significant. It is the doing and undoing of the selfish I. That is its work in Use. It is in us the divine ‘I's Awakening. His Word as the divine verb will bring the form of life, that He is now preparing. The word of Truth when He shall speak, shall do the divine work's reactive result. What is the reaction imperative in I to all in life that in pain is the strife? It is to find in I in the strife the free expansion in spirit. It is to know the divine 'I's use. It is to realize within God's reaction as penance, as free use impersonal divine. Life as self-use is misery. It is selfish play in reaction, and one is in its use, the show uncontrolled. One is in its play in opposites as mind contro-action, use impure and un­satisfied. One is unhappy in life selfish. One is unholy as selfish self-act impure unactive in I as spir­it. Immature in mind, we in its use unconscious, design as unreal. Baba wanting us to realize the true show of Him in reaction in the sphere in I in the infinite, says this: "I here now shall use, to show in you the divine reaction in I infinite in One-in-I, in reaction to my own use whenever I will. Sowing in I, is to realize in I infinite the divine reaction in winning will. To sow I, in mind infinite operate in mind infinite, and in mind infinite reaction, whenever I in mind infinite owe to sow. That is the sign in mind infinite of Me in any or all as omnipresent order infinite.'' 
To resign, one has to realize in state in Being in Peace which is the divine state in Being in peace. To know this, is to have to give in life, mind and the divine 'I' in the infinite in reactionless realizing reaction. That is—to see, know, feel instead to think and to react in the intellect. 
Baba states: "To use the divine life of Me here now, it is good to grow indifferent to self-use in the intellect. That is a very interesting experiment to do as in it one is in rapture in self-use infinite, No-one. That is to say, one is use infinite of life divine and no more of the show in self use Life descended. To all who live in selfish of one's own human creation. Me resigned I conscious, do help to That is the use I here make of you, realize life infinite. I help to give who in I infinite has to react in use way to life in use unselfish. I am One infinite for My own use as the divine I -Truth -The Way to One," 
