 
In April 1903 Hazrat Baba Jan set out to perform haj (pilgrimage to Mecca). She sailed from Bombay by the pilgrim boat S. S. “Haidari". On board the ship, amongst many others as pilgrims, there were Professor Haider Ebrahim Sayani and Noormohmed Pankhawala of Bombay. 
On the way to Jeddah the ship got into trouble. A sudden storm developed. As a result the ship began to heave to and fro dangerously at the mercy of the waves. 
The overcrowded pilgrims—men, women and children—were all panic-stricken. When they all despaired of life and safety, and when everyone was thinking how best to meet the watery death, Baba Jan beckoned to one Noormohmed Pankhawala, and told him to tie a kerchief round his neck, and beg a pice from every passenger including even children. 
When Noormohmed had finished 
collections to which the English 
officers of the boat also contributed, 
Baba Jan asked Noormohmed to 
pray in the following words: "0 God, save us our ship; with this (collection) we will give a feast (niyaz) to the poor in the holy name of your Prophet Mohomed." The instructions were followed; the storm subsided immediately; the ship and its human cargo landed safely at Jeddah. 
... 

A lyrical show was to be staged in a theatre at Talegaon, a small town about 20 miles from Poona. That particular night, owing to the popularity of the cast in the play, there was an unusual rush, and the theatre was choked to its capacity. The management had no go but to lock the doors. 
Unhappily fire broke out in the theatre from nowhere and instantan­eously assumed gigantic proportions, taking a pretty good toll of life. 
Simultaneously at 3 a.m. in Poona Baba Jan was observed to talk and behave quite unusually. She was heard saying quite excitedly and angrily, "It is fire, it is fire; doors are locked and people are burning. O you fire, 
get extinguished." 
People from the scene of tragedy relate that the locks automatically opened, and what ordinarily would have turned out to be a tragedy of the worst order was providentially averted. The time of the opening of the locks at Talegaon synchronized with Baba Jan's angry mood in Poona. 
... 

Once a faqir from Ajmer appeared before Hazrat Baba Jan, and said that he had a request to make. When ordered to utter it, the faqir conti­nued, " I had in mind a pilgrimage to Baghdad. For that matter I had been to the shrine of Khwajasaheb of Ajmer. From there I have been ordered to submit my request to Hazrat Baba Jan who would see to the fulfilment thereof. And here I am. Kindly provide me with funds enough to meet the expenses of food and travel so that I may start early." For two days the faqir was in Baba Jan's darbar (presence). The third day—being winter it was piercing cold—early in the morning Baba Jan, being in a playful mood, indulged in a very humorous spree. 
She addressed the faqir, "You want to go to Baghdad, isn't it? Very well, you will be in Baghdad. I will send you there in a jiffy. Go on to the road and stand erect. When I order you to fly, you should begin flying in the air. Do you understand?" 
The faqir believed in what Baba Jan said, and also knew that it was very easy for saints to transport human beings thousands of miles away even physically. Accordingly he took up his stand by the roadside, opposite to Baba Jan's seat, expectant every moment to rise in the air at the words of Baba Jan for an aerial flight to Baghdad. 
When he stood there a few seconds, Baba Jan rasped out the words, "Oorh", i.e., "Fly". The faqir was just where he was, the ground and his feet parting company a few inches only when he himself attempted a little jumping on hearing Baba Jan's words, "Oorh". At the initial failure the faqir looked dismayed, and turned towards Baba Jan. Baba Jan asked him to continue the attempt. The poor fellow did as he was told, and hoped any minute the earth would part company with his feet. 

After a time Baba Jan asked him to come away, and said, "My good man, you wish to fly to Baghdad without wings, without money? Whoever suggested you this trick? Do you sincerely desire to go to Baghdad?" On receiving an affirmative reply, Baba Jan called out to some unknown entity, "Is there anyone around? Yes brother, see that this man reaches Baghdad." Within ten minutes after the utterance of the words, a. gentleman from Gujrat comes up, and, after rendering obeis­ance, tenders a purse to Baba Jan containing Rs. 300 in cash. Baba Jan immediately earmarked the amount with a. view to safeguard it from the attacks of other mendicants by saying, "This belongs to Baghdadwala." Thus speaking she threw the purse to the faqir from Ajmer, and asked him to depart. He left immediately singing Baba Jan's praises. 
... 

One day a man approached Baba Jan and offered to take her for tea to a nearby tea-shop. Baba Jan stipulated, "Yes, I go with you to a tea-shop, but I shall pay for the tea." 
The man replied, "I have money with me in my pockets. You are a faqir, Where can you get money from?" Baba Jan asked, "Where is the cash with you?" The man very egotistic­ally jingled coins in his pocket which amounted to nearabout Rs. thirty to forty. Baba Jan and the party wended their way towards a teashop. Tea was ordered and drunk by everybody. When it came to paying at the counter, before coming out of the tea­shop, the man put his hands in his pockets to find to his utter dismay that there was no money there. He appealingly told Baba Jan, "How is it? I haven't a pie in my pocket!” Baba Jan said, "You just now jingled a good quantity of money." He became crestfallen and came out with Baba Jan to the seat underneath the tree. On reaching the destination he discovered that the cash was there intact in his pocket. 
... 

A man happened to lose his horse, and he could trace it nowhere. He approached Baba Jan, and let forth his complaint. Baba Jan pointed with her finger in one parti­

cular direction, and asked him to go straight until the horse was found. Getting this hint, the man left imme­diately, and proceeded in the direction pointed out by Baba Jan. He had not proceeded far, when lo, to his surprise, the horse was observed coming towards him from the opposite direction. He was awfully pleased, and loading a good quantity of sweets on the back of the horse, he came along with it to Baba Jan, and requested her to distribute the sweets to the crowd with her own august hands. Baba Jan caressed the horse, and distributed the sweets as requested. 
... 

One Hindu woman, a devotee of Baba Jan, very humbly and suppli­catingly submitted to Baba Jan that she was married these ten years, but was not yet blessed with an issue. She requested Baba Jan's blessings in her case. Baba Jan blessed her, and said, "Your first issue would be a son." Exactly after a year and a half, the lady returned and placed the male baby at the feet of Baba Jan. Baba Jan took up the child in her arms, played with it for some 
time, and allowed the mother and the child to depart with her blessings. 
... 

Once a man, suffering from intermittent fever (quotidian type), appeared before Baba Jan, trembling and shaking terribly, and begged of Baba Jan to relieve him of the complaint. Baba Jan got wild at him, and snatched away the piece of cloth with which he was covering his body. It was winter time, and Baba Jan insisted on him to pass the night in the open almost naked. Early in the morning the man felt relieved. The temperature which had persisted for almost a week had disappeared. He fell at the feet of Baba Jan and departed. 
... 

Once a motor driver, coming towards Poona from Mahabaleshwar, saw Baba Jan near Shivapur walking on foot towards Poona. He accosted Baba Jan and offered a seat, but she refused. The motor driver happened to come straight to Baba Jan's seat under the margosa tree near Char Bavadi, and what a surprise was there for 

him! Baba Jan was seated as usual surrounded by people. It could never have been possible for Baba Jan to walk fourteen miles from Shivapur to Poona in half an hour. The motor driver related the incident to every­one assembled there. 
... 

A Hindu gentleman, a great devotee of Baba Jan, used to live in a village near Parvati Hills outside Poona. He used to come daily in the evenings for Baba Jan's darshana, and return home in the night. One day after darshana, while he was about to return, Baba Jan said, "You are going, but beware, if you come across any danger on the road, draw a line with your finger on the ground and repeat my name." After giving this warning Baba Jan allowed him to go. When the man reached the outskirts of Poona city and entered into the open country-side, he heard somebody calling him by his name. He recognized the voice to belong to some relative of his who was dead. He became very much perplexed and frightened. When he advanced a few steps further, he was frightened out of his wits to see the same 
dead relation standing before him and addressing him in the following words: "Now what can save you today from out of my clutches?" The man was so much scared that he stood rooted to the spot. All of a sudden he remembered Baba Jan's parting words of advice. He immed­iately did as he was told, and, after drawing the line with his finger on the ground, when he raised himself up, instead of the apparition before him, he was surprisingly pleased to see Baba Jan standing before him. Baba Jan spoke a few words of comfort and solace, and asked him to proceed, promising that nothing would disturb him thereafter. 
... 

Once a man brought three jilebis (Indian sweet) to Baba Jan. At the time, there was a considerable crowd standing round about Baba Jan's seat. Baba Jan gave away the three jilebis to one faqir from amongst them. One person complained, saying, "Baba Jan, what have we done that you have not given us a little of those jilebis?" Baba Jan smiled, and just called out in a sweet voice, "Brother, bring sufficient jilebis so that 

MIRACLES OF BABA JAN    
each one may get three." In a short while thereafter an unknown man brings a trayful of jilebis, which was distributed amongst the crowd, and right enough each one from amongst the crowd got three jilebis. 
... 

A Zoroastrian child aged about 10 years had lost his eyesight altogether. His guardians brought him to Baba Jan, and when told of the sorry plight of the child, BabaJan mumbled some words, and blew her breath upon his eyes. The child immediately recov­ered its eyesight, and began to jump about joyfully, saying, "I can see now, I can see." 
... 

Whilst Hazrat Maher Baba was camping near Chatarsingi off Fergusson College Road in the year 1921, a few members of the mandali in Bombay were allowed to visit him every week-end. There was, however, one condition imposed that no one should come to him direct without taking Hazrat Baba Jan's darshana first. Not only this, but immediately after landing at Poona railway station, one was expected to go straight to Baba Jan, and after paying obeisence there, one was at liberty to attend to other work. 
As usual one week-end Dr. G.. arrived in Poona, and failed to go straight to Baba Jan. As he was to meet Meher Baba the following morning, Dr. G.. thought Baba Jan can be met conveniently in the night. After attending to his work in Poona, Dr. G.. approached Baba Jan at about 10-30 p.m., but was informed by the attendants around her that she was fast asleep and had retired only a few minutes ago. Finding Baba Jan fast asleep and covered from head to toe with a white sheet cloth, Dr. G. began to take stock of his surroundings, and seated himself against the railing of the Malcolm Tank area just near to Baba Jan's feet. 
Before he had settled down thoroughly, Baba Jan threw up the counterpane and flew at Dr. G..'s throat, striking, kicking, gnawing, scratching, at the same time kept repeating the words, "You came in the morning and you come so late in the night? " 
All this scene, which scared everyone around, happened within a few seconds, and then 

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
she retired to sleep once again, covered by the counterpane from head to foot. After ten minutes she gets up and accosts Dr. G., "My child, when did you come? Why didn't you tell me you had arrived? You must be feeling cold. Will someone get a cup of tea for this child ?" 
... 

During the fag end of her life, Baba Jan was observed to grow weaker and weaker, and she would have attacks of fever which would make her lie unconscious for days together. This condition of her health naturally aroused concern amongst the trustees who constituted them­selves into a body for attending to the obsequies and the construction of the shrine for which Hazrat Meher Baba had donated Rs. 4000. 
Baba Jan's seat being in the Cantonment area, everyone thought that the military authorities would refuse permission for Baba Jan's burial within their limits. The trustees saw and proposed many sites in different parts of the city, but there was no unanimity amongst them about any one particular spot. One day they decided to approach Baba Jan herself and settle the question of her burial ground direct. No sooner they approached her, Baba Jan flew into rage at the sight of them, and said, "Get away from here. How can the dead show concern for the living? I am not going to leave this place." Thus Baba Jan decided the question of her burial ground, and at the same time conveyed to them that materially-minded people are more dead than alive. 
... 

Baba Jan, as everyone knows, had a number of rings—brass, copper and iron ones—on almost all of her fingers. Once one of the rings on the fingers got stuck, and consequently the finger became frightfully swollen. Ultimately it began to drain pus and blood, but Baba Jan refused to apply any medicine. Once Mr. S., from Nasik, who was a daily visitor to Baba Jan, proposed application of boric powder. Baba Jan thereupon became enraged, and said, "You want to belittle my Faqiri (Perfection)?" For days together Baba Jan suffered unimaginable pain due to that fes­tering finger. One day a Hindu gentleman brought a 
little pickles of mango for Baba Jan  near Malcolm Tank under the margosa  
which she received and directly tied it  tree! Since some of them were the  
on to the wound. Surprisingly enough  actual perpetrators of the tragedy, they  
by this strange medication the wound  came to recognize Baba Jan's spiritual  
healed within a few days.  worth, and paid her a great ovation.  
. . .  . . .  
Though referred to before, one of the  Material, mental and physical healing  
outstanding events in Baba Jan's life  was a twenty-four hour programme with  
was the fact of her being buried alive by  Baba Jan throughout her stay in Poona,  
the fanatic Mahomedans of the North  but the greatest miracle that she may  
West Frontier Province for the utterance  truly be said to have performed was the  
of gnosis in a moment of ecstacy quite  giving of God-realisation to Hazrat Me  
blasphemous and shocking to their  her Baba. Her parting words to Hazrat  
religious sense. After some time, what a  Maher Baba were, "I have made you  
surprise was in store for one of the  that Perfect today that very soon half  
Baluchi regiments transferred to Poona,  the world would be at your feet."  
when they found Baba Jan seated  
.  
