LIFE OF SAINT KULASEKHARA AZHVAR 
BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 
Our Saint is a Royal Saint. He was the ruler of Travancore (Southern India). His father Dridhavrata was childless, and by the grace of God this saintly son was born. The son became proficient in all the sacred lore and the arts of government and war. As was usual with the kings of olden times, the father installed Kulasekhara on the gadi (throne) and retired for spiritual contemplation. The latter conquered many countries and became the ruler of Kolli-Kavalan (Chera country), Kudal (Madura, Pandya territory) and Kozhi (Uraiyur Chola kingdom). He was the greatest monarch of his time. He was virtuous 

• 
and just, and people under him were quite happy. 
One day he had a divine vision, and he thenceforth found that the joys of this world were ephemeral, and understood that they must be taken only as the means to an end. He invited learned men and read with them all the sacred lore, and produced the most exquisite garlands of poems called the Mukundamala. He was surrounded by Vaishnava bhaktas and became God-sick. His ministers wanted to get rid of them. They contrived a plan. They told the King that his Vaishnava bhaktas stole the precious necklace kept in the temple, and that they should be sent 
• 
ContinuefroJun193issue

POEM 21 

away from the land. The King, it is said, directed the ministers to bring a vessel with a live deadly cobra in it. It was readily brought. The King, addressing the ministers, said, "I am thrusting my hand into this vessel. If these bhaktas are innocent this cobra will not bite me. So saying he put his hand into the vessel. But the cobra would not bite him. The ministers were put to shame, and they departed. Thenceforth he was on the Path, and sang:  (1) 
"Desire I not bodily births 
Which pamper to the wants of flesh." 
( 2 ) 
"Desire I not delights of sense, 
Nor sov'reignty over all this earth." (Perumal Tirumozhi, which our King-Saint wrote.) He also wrote: 
''What makes me King is not the crown Which men set on my head; But King, when King of Kings doth make His lotus Feet my crown." He died at the age of sixty-seven, 94 
Kaliyug, Parabahava, Punarvasu 
asterism. Blessed be Saint Kulasekhara-Azhvar. 
