

The East already knows me,  There are hundreds of reli- 
I have some thousands of  gious teachers in the East, who  
followers in India and Persia.  call themselves Pandits, well  
I have not chosen the West;  versed in scriptures and full of  
it is not a question of choice,  wise sayings to fit any  
but a question of where my  eventuality, but there are very  
work is most needed to have  few who have achieved per- 
spirituality and materialism go  sonal experience of the Highest  
hand in hand.  One—the real thing is to feel  
Mr. Gandhi, after reading my  experience and to realize the One  
script, has been so impressed  Infinite Consciousness, and that  
that he offered to have them  is possible only through love,  
translated into the vernacular,  and is inspired by contact with a  
so that the masses could have  Perfect Master; without that  
the benefit of learning from  contact none has attained  
them.  Perfection.  
c  

The true life is lived when  Devil, Anti-Christ; but to me it  
one feels both heart and head  is all the same; I know what I  
balanced; intellect and feeling  am.  
linked; materialism and spiri- I see my own life in everyone,  
tualism blended. Then only can  so continually realize that I am  
one realize the Infinite in every  the Infinite One, and this "I" is  
phase of life and be in harmony  not the outcome of the limited  
with everyone and everything,  finite egoism, but it is the  
and living in the world of  outcome of actual experience  
matter, yet feeling detached, so  of the highest state.  
be identified with the One  When an Avatar has to  
Personal God.  manifest, for some period  
There are two aspects of the  before his manifestation, he  
Infinite One—Personal and  either fasts, keeps silent, or  
Impersonal. The Impersonal  adopts some inner discipline  
lies beyond the domain of  for the benefit of the world. He  
creation and transcends even  does not do this for his own  
the mental plane. The Personal  sake, because, having attained  
aspect of God is the Perfect  to the Highest, nothing is left  
Master who, having attained to  for him to do for his own self;  
the Impersonal aspect, lives in  but before manifestation what- 
the world, and, using Maya,  soever he does, his mind is  
helps others towards Truth.  universal.  
I never wish to be called  Ramakrishna did not touch  
Redeemer, Saviour, Divine  money.  
Majesty so soon. The disciples  Buddha never ate food cook- 
through their love, faith, enthu­ ed by others.  
siasm gave such titles; there are  Jesus fasted forty days.  
many who misunderstand me,  I keep silent.  
call me Satan,  
c  
