Shri Meher Baba's Tour* 
OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA 
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI

 IN October 1937, while still in want you to join me on a trip through Europe, Baba called me and said, "We certain cities. I want you to see me at shall return soon to India,  and there I work there as you have seen me at work 
here." 

When Baba says to do a thing that is the moment when He wants it to be done; and when He wants it to be done, that is the time to do it. So it happens that He drew out the following itinerary of this nine days trip on the west coast and through Central India. 
We are to leave "Meherabad" on De≠cember 20th 1937 and we stop at Talegaon, Bombay, Navasari and Nag≠pur, returning to "Meherabad" Decem≠ber 30th.
   The trip is to be started on the days prescribed a long time ahead, on trains which Baba personally selects so as to reach the places in time, where He needs to be for His work. 
   On this nine days tour, Baba makes Himself available to man. He calls on man to be in readiness, whether He encircles the globe or designs, in no time, a huge extravagant expedition to the south of France, it is to call on man to stir the spiritual want, to renew in atmosphere the swinging show of Divine Love. 
   He gives appointments ahead to see X... on such a date, at a definite hour for a minute or two as the case may require.  Once He took the most rapid express through Europe, enduring the physical strain for eighteen hours ride to see, for a few moments, a child.... He goes to Talegaon to see two brothers. In Nagpur He is requested to see the masses. Whether it is to adjust small family troubles, or to advise a huge cosmopoli≠tan assembly of men in search for Truth, or to hold alive for a few days longer a soul that has to transgress life, He stages His work in time. No matter the method and no matter the proportion of reward in visible faith awakening; no matter if He will be recognized, He is sure to want in them the Truth. He does in work, in life, in Being, the awakening; places and circumstances whichever suit His show. 
   Talegaonóthe 20th December 1937. This little village is the first stop on our tour. There happens to be a short pause in activities, when Baba comes to my room and orders me to start writing my 'impressions' from the time we left "Meherabad," that same day in the mor≠ning. It is now afternoon. 
Wherever Baba goes, He holds at first a general revision of the home, He walks from room to room, into the kitchen, 

 
the servants' quarters, the stables, the garden. He takes in the people's troubles and small disputing worries, and if there is a cat or a dog, none are left out. His huge universal heart and hand must at once feel out the state of affairs of every one and every thing. 
   And so it happens that Baba design≠nates for each of us the room where we are to spend the night. Walking along the terrace, Baba stops before the small entrance that has hanging over the door the insignia of "court room". He turns around and looks at me with a certain sense of humour showing me this tiniest court room in all the world, where Tale≠gaon disposes of its rights and wrongs. This room has been turned into a bedroom for the occasion and Baba, with humourous delight, offers it to me for the night. 
   Before I describe the exquisite hospi≠tality of these dear wonderful people, A...the Hon. Magistrate and Mrs. A...his wife, our perfect hostess, I will return to the initial start of our trip. 
We leave "Meherabad" at 6:00 a. m. precise. The sun is quietly rising be≠hind the distant hills of Chandbibi, where lived the daring Mohamedan Queen in the past history of Ahmednagar. 
   Our road leads via Poona. We motor along the soft curving mountains I know so well, that encircle the distant horizon of 'Meherabad' and which we con≠template every evening in Baba's company at sunset. The atmosphere is still and blue at this early hour, and all seems to function right in its own experience. We pass white bundled figures, herding goats, lazy dogs, aban≠doned in their own struggle of life, lying around within the boundaries of a tiny village. Baba, looking at all these small lives in poor huts says, "How I love all these..." 
We approach Poona. In the distance we recognize the landmark of the white towered Turf Club with its elegant gates, and we all make the wish to see Baba's childhood home! Baba willingly accepts the plan. 
   It is 8:00 a.m. when the car gently swings into a small lane and stops in       front of a large, comfortable looking house. Adi, Baba's brother, accustomed to surprises, hearing 

the familiar sound of the horn, walks out leisurely to greet us, holding in his deep emotion, humbly postrating himself to the ground, takes Darshana from his Unique Brother. 
   Baba's mother, cheering us cordially from behind a curtain, apologises for not being dressed to play up to the occasion; but Baba, who times with measure unfathomable, does not wait. He rushes us out of the main house over to the other side of the lane, where, at the joining point of three streets, stands a smaller houseóBaba's childhood home. The house apparently is not in use, although the windows and the shutters seem to be newly painted blue. With great animation Baba Himself opens the door. The inside is empty, the atmosphere clear, quiet and full of awe. There are two rooms on the ground floor. To one side of the entrance is a circular wall forming a bathing space where, "little Merwan" used to be given his ablutions, thus told us the mother who meanwhile has arrived. 
   Baba makes the following statement: "One day men  from  all  parts of the world will come on pilgrimage." And we shall witness then, as we do now, the miracle of His blessed life; the miracle is in Him a presage of divine order since age and time, but no one is the Pure One without the divine creation plan of martyrdom having been fulfilled to the end-state. So in childhood He was pure, real, good and unselfish always. Little Merwan was also full of energy and fire, giving fun and joy to all. 
A small vertical stepladder leads to the upper floor. Baba shows us the way; we follow. We stand in a chamber-like space, crushed under its low ceiling. Here Baba used to spend those significant hours in anguish, waiting to descend to make Himself available to mankind as the Pure Human, as the divine experiment in its fulfilled order in BEING in Truth. Here He remained aloof in His divine selfless state in mind, still unself-consciousóand too often disturbed by good friends and members of the familyóespecially by His good mother who did not trust His unfathomable state, above mind, and wanted to keep Him the same as He was before, Merwan, her precious son...So 

 
she tried to do her best to hold Him down, closer to her, by making Him eat specially well prepared earthly food. Baba, wistful in joking manner, wanting to make us acquainted with facts, de≠scribes how He used to hide the food, which was too heavy for Him to digest, by hiding it in an old drawer and then into His pocket at night time, when He would leave the house and deposit it somewhere in the street for hungry dogs to eat.
   Overwhelmed by the atmosphere of many sacred memories we are carried away...feeling the conscious contact with Him present, He the Life, the God-realized Man. The Divine Theme seems vast against the trivial background of small facts. With sudden changing mood, Baba bids us quickly climb down and return to the main house. 
   Baba makes us walk through all the rooms which at present are occupied by his mother, Shirinmai, Adi, His younger brother and His brother Behram's family. The house is comfortable and roomy and neatly kept.
   Baba is intensely amused. He wants to  show us more. We rush on to the court≠yard... there is the famous well with its excellent water and the big tree that Baba recognizes as an old friend. The connecting smaller houses encircle this garden, and, at present, are occupied by strangers who all are very well ac≠quainted with the saintliness of the place. At the other end Baba points to two doors carefully locked with huge chains and padlocks. Mother, who is a little anxious to dramatize the past of the adolescent God, says, "This was His prayer-chapel..." But Baba, interrupting her, discreet as usual, explains, "Here I have spent many hours in solitude, and in that room," pointing to the other door, "Gustadji (then His colleague, now His disciple) kept vigil." 
We return to the main quarters; but before leaving the house, Baba pauses at the door way. He seems to be absorbed in His childhood memories and then suddenly says: "Here, when I was a small boy, I used to play wild games with my chumsÖ." How those small fellows who, then in no way conscious of His Unfathomable Being, dared to touch Him in 

their boyish crude manner, and exper≠ience in furious adversity their childish games. But how He loved them. How He, already then, although unconscious of His powers, was pouring joy and divine Love, and how, for all that he has been adored, beloved and intuitively followed. At that time Merwan was full of fun and mischief but knowing and wise; His word even then was accepted. People around used to listen to the charm of His voice with its incomp≠arable sweetness. 
The unfathomable life in Him drew from the Divine Source and created thrill of indivisible Love, unselfish af≠fection and friendship in so many. 
   Baba's arrival and departure is always quick, but deep in its effect. We are ordered to leave, and without special ceremony, we wave good-bye through the window of the car and speed off to Talegaon, our next halt. Baba arrives at Talegaon, as the executive modern factor in Being-Order of Truth, who comes to work facts of truth." 
(to be continued) 