When I was six, I lived on Main Street, the shopping thoroughfare in Poona. At that time I did not know Babajan was a Perfect Master. Our family had no idea of that. Nobody had told us anything. 
One day, I saw Babajan walking through the street with a torn sheet on her shoulders and with a slightly thick stick in her hand. She walked with firm, strong steps. I would look sadly at her when mischievous little children in the street, who didn't know who she was, would run after her and pull her sheet. She would turn around and say not to do that. Then another boy would tease her and again pull her sheet from her and her clothes. They thought, "Oh, it's an old woman and we can have some fun." Babajan would tell them nicely to stop teasing her, but they didn't listen. So she would hold up the stick and show it to them saying, "go away", and off they ran. That I remember seeing. 
Many years later when I was about ten or eleven, Zeena, a school friend of mine, came to me and said, "Mehera, do you know Babajan? Babajan sits under the neem tree. You know, she is very great. .. yes, she is very great. She knows everything and she can also give us anything we ask for. Come, we'll go together and we'll ask for something." I said, "Alright, there's still time for the school bell to ring." Zeena told me to ask for anything; ask even to come out first in your class, or ask for a good education; "Ask anything, and I'm going to ask also." But I never asked her what it was that she wanted to ask. We started walking fast. 
As it happened, on that day, Babajan was not sitting under the neem tree, but under a banyan tree outside of our school wall in a broad, clean, dry, and sandy gutter where the rain water drains away. Behind the school wall was a Catholic Church. Here, near the wall, under this big banyan tree, Babajan was sitting like a monarch. 
Zeena whispered to me, "You go first.", I said "No, I feel shy ... you go first." Zeena went up to Babajan and spoke to her. Then I started thinking, "What should I ask for?" I didn't have anything to ask for, but I must ask for something. Being a child, I couldn't think of the best thing to ask for. At that moment, Zeena returned and said, "Mehera, now you go." I went and knelt down near Babajan. Babajan looked at me and smiled. I also smiled and then remembered I have to ask for something. I started to think very hard ... "What is the best thing that I could ask for? .. Oh yes, a horse! I want a riding horse." 
Now, I did not have a horse because my mother would not buy me one; after my father died, my mother did not want to keep horses and grooms, except for the one necessary carriage horse. So I told Babajan, "I want a horse." When I said it, it sounded rather funny, but I was very serious. Babajan looked into my eyes ... She continued looking at me for awhile with a very sweet smile and nodded. Then she turned her head around and looked up at the sky for awhile. She was talking, but so softly that I couldn't catch the words, and being shy, I didn't lean forward to listen to what Babajan was saying. I was waiting for Babajan to give me an answer, yes or no, or to say something. But Babajan continued looking up at the sky, talking softly. I could catch a few sentences in Urdu ... "Oh yes, a very beautiful one ... he will be a very beautiful one. All the world will look at him, admire him, and love him." When I heard these words, I said to myself, "Oh, I am going to get such a beautiful horse, that when I ride him, all the people in the street will look and say, "What a beautiful horse." I felt very happy. 
At that moment, Babajan turned around and looked at me and said, "All right, you may go now." I was still feeling a bit shy and hoped I had not annoyed Babajan. I stood up and went towards where Zeena was, and we both set off for school at a quick pace, for the bell was ringing for school and we were afraid to be late for class, knowing our teacher would be annoyed with us. My friend and I held hands and fast we ran. Then what do you think? Reaching school, I completely forgot that I had asked Babajan about the horse! 
One day, some months later, when I came home from school, my mother was not at home. We went to wash, then ate the food my aunt gave us, and out we went into the garden to play. Later my aunt came to me and said, "Mehera, go and look in the stable .. Your mother has bought a very nice horse for you." I was sure she was pulling my leg because my mother would never buy a horse. My aunt knew I liked horses, and she was probably teasing me. So, I said, "No, I want to finish my game. I know you are teasing," and I continued playing. My aunt came a little closer and said, "No Mehera, but I am telling you the truth. Just go and see. Go to the stable and see for yourself." My cousin was with me, and we both thought that maybe she was not teasing, so we said, "All right, let's go and see." 
Off we went to the stables at the backside of the 
house. Reaching the stable, I couldn't believe my 
eyes ... there he was, a very beautiful white horse, 
and a very young horse he was ... six months old. 
He was a very spirited horse and he was moving 
around, sort of restless in a new place. A spirited 
horse was what I liked best, and he was such a 

beauty, snow white with a pinkish nose, and not a spot or a hair of any other color ... but to show that he was not an albino, he had one blue and one black eye. That was the only thing strange about him ... one eye a very beautiful blue, and the other jet black. 
My father had taught me to ride when I was six years old. He was an officer, so he had his riding horses and was frequently transferred from place to place. So each time I returned home from school, there was a new place to stay and new ponies to ride. He always kept a stable with ponies ready, so I felt confident on a horse because as a child, my father had given me this training and the liking for riding. So when I saw the white horse, I liked him very much and instead of being afraid. I thought to myself, "Oh, when can I ride this horse?" 
Now a day or two later, after the horse had arrived, all the men folk were out. My uncles had business in town, my mother not at home, but my aunt, grandfather and grandmother and children were all there. I went to the room where they kept harnesses and saddles, and I asked the groom to saddle the white horse. I did not know then about a horse being broken-in before riding, so I did not ask whether or not this new horse was used to a person riding him. 
The groom harnessed the horse and led it out of the stable. I was quite fearless. He gave me a lift on to the horse and I put my hands on the reins. I guided the horse naturally. I did not go out by the front gate because I knew my aunt would see me, and she would not have wanted me to go riding. She was afraid, the horse being spirited, I might be thrown. So what I did was to go from the back side of the house, across the field, and on to the main road which led to the Bund Gardens and the bridle path. 
I recalled that on this well-kept path, I had often seen European men and women riding their horses, espec≠ially on Sunday. It was a gay sight. How nice they looked riding and galloping. Now this horse of mine was soon to be cantering on this same bridal path. 
To continue my story, I started out and came around the corner near the side of the house when suddenly my grandmother saw me. She called out to me, "Come back, Mehera, come back. Don't ride that horse ... he'll drop you ... he'll throw you." I shouted back, "It's all right, don't worry." and I continued on to the Bund Garden and the bridle path, and enjoyed my ride. I was careful the horse did not shy, and sure enough, I returned home safely. 
However, sometimes the horse would be mischie≠vous. He would go over to the carriage horse and both would break free of their ropes and run out of the compound. We would hear our next door neighbors shouting, "Oh, the horses are running!" and we would rush out and see the two horses, running and galloping along the road. The groom, with help, had such a time trying to control the horses. Even so, my mother wanted to keep the white horse. Now, we had two horses. 
As a child, being very playful, I'd completely forgotten that I had asked Babajan for a horse and that Babajan had said, "All right," and so this was Babjan's gift. 
The horse was indeed lucky, for we had not had him for a full two years when we came to Baba, leaving our home in Poona and coming to stay in what is now known as lower Meherabad. This was in the year 1924, when Beloved Baba called my mother and me, and at the same time He sent for Khorshed, Naja, and Jamshed's wife, Khorshed. The most important point is that Baba had told Meheru's father, Rustum, to bring the white horse to Meherabad. So this horse was brought to Meherabad and kept in a room of the old bungalow. This was a small room which had just one little step up to it. I was not there when the horse arrived, but someone who was there later told me that Beloved Baba mounted the horse for a moment. Beloved Baba, so slim and wearing a long white sadra, must have looked very beautiful astride the white horse. 
Now, much later, in the year 1944, I was reading 'Kalyan', a Hindi book on spiritual themes. I came across a colored picture in this book of the 'Kaliyuga' Avatar. This present time is known as the 'Kaliyuga' cycle. The sign or symbol of the Avatar of this 'yuga' (age) is the Avatar seated on a white horse. Now this picture I had seen in 'Kalyan' showed a fiery white horse with a figure riding it holding a sword. The white horse means leadership. 
The Avatar of this present time, Meher Baba, said, "Age after age, when the wick of Righteousness burns low, the Avatar comes yet once again to rekindle the torch of Love and Truth. Age after age, amidst the clamour of disruptions, wars, fear and chaos, rings the Avatar's call: "COME ALL UNTO ME." The time is come. I repeat the Call, and bid all come unto me." 
