Shri Meher Baba is Donation perpetual of Truth in Grace. To say this, one has to know within, the significance of the act of grace. Grace is personification of Life Real doing in us Truth—as real experience. Grace is new wonder in us in experience. Grace is what is unconscious in us having become conscious. Grace is perpetual time making fact—ordering conscience —making in us new the state real, established since one is in search of One as God. So it is in us Grace that what He in us is operating for use unselfish. It is Grace when He sends in us Good Will to make good for some ill. It is Grace when He in us does good to compare with the past bad condition. He is reaction in perpetual divine Grace in every moment of our life. It is Grace—that He is descended—to live-in in us anew the old One as Truth. 
He has to be the realized estab­lished show of Truth in form human, in order to give us life, in order to have life in Him, and in order to make us know Him, what He as mind in universe is—what He designs in reaction infinite. How do I or you know what is real, pure good—if we find in reaction in opposition the relative state that is in no way pure? How do weseefrom A to B, from B to C, without some other view ahead, which is deep and new—which is free in us to give us high order to personify? What is to personify? Is it not to realize? What is to give-in? Is it to make in giving-in new the old state in ignorance? 
Is it to live in us anew the phase we have passed through in order to earn the the next one, that we have to realize? It is exactly so. We have to see, grow, form, earn and fulfil throughout phases in mind in I as use individual and unconscious till we become conscious in Him. Shri Meher Baba is here to give the impulse to win over the old self-state selfish in continuous show in reaction in controversy. 
We must win. We need to win and We shall win. But how? By being in us new, by being in us fearless, by being without prejudice, by being impersonal. What we know has to bring-in the lived and realized new earning. We have to realize again the fact of us being one. 

It is a small life as human being that experiences creating the external reaction—the divine life that is in him is the fulfilled state realized. 
What we consciously see, know and win, we in Him see, realize to the paramount point of Truth in fulfilment. 
One needs the Jesus—the Pure One—the living example—the Christ personified to be able to see-on the Way—to One the Way is hard and it is unconscious strife, but in Him resigned it is Light in self-state of Being, that is knowing. One feels free, one is fearless and unconditional in determination. Why? Because He is in it the directing will, the leading sign in Being in Him as life unselfish. He the being, He being Truth personified—it is easy to make use of the progressing advancing, realizing order in us in conscience. One feels certain in Him as His own subject in obedient realizing action. One is real in doing any order of 
reaction, as in it He is Truth. He as the selfless state realized, is the pure one. He as divine I infinite, is real Life. One is sure of seeing in Him the Way bring on the fruit of all efforts and the new reacting results. 
It is far to say that He is One, I, God. How do I know Him to be One, I, God? I am knowing in me of Truth. I am seeing in Me—Him as Truth, as Jesus—who is, who was in me life realized—as fact. I know in me—Him as Krishna, as in Him I was in Being in I as Truth part of Him of Truth at His life's time as Krishna. I see Him as Mohamed as I, as Truth, as God's One, because in me He is One­Truth-Form that in Being is the established realized state infinite. 
We as His disciples, as His surrendered life, know, see, feel in us—Him as the One, as the I infinite. He is personification of life as Truth, as He is the Being in all. This is in all who know, see, feel real experience in existence infinite. 
Shri Meher Baba is to our life infinite—I divine. He is Faith-State real in us. He is as Truth-State real in us—the One. One is Truth. One is Faith-State of real realized 

expansion in selfless design. Life is dedication perpetual to God if in oneness experienced. The One is dedication infinite in our life as One as part of Him who is Pure All-One. To see this, one is giving-in one's own I as life in experience; in other words, One is abstinent of the self-state in reaction. To see this—One is in Him resigned in every hour of one's own external and individual life. One has no life for one's own use. One lives, one does, one creates, one reacts as he wishes. One is active when he designs. One is abstinent of the use of one's own I— for Use to Him. It means to disregard the experience for self-use in us. It means to resign the use selfish of one's own I. This state temporary in realizing reaction resigned in Him furthers our intuitive understanding. We realize more and further. 
Life in Love infinite, in Him resigned, shall make in us the wonder of realization—that will create us anew as human creature. We shall live the new order of life in universal self-use in us in love unselfish. To love on our Way— new, is to love unselfish. To love on our way—real, is to love unselfish. To live in Him in One in All in any, is to see, to know, to feel in all life—the One-All-Way as Life One. It is to see, to know, to feel and practise one-all-one-I, as use unselfish. 
He shall, present in us, renew the old spiritual theme of life that is to live for others. We shall be made able to live a life real when in Him we shall consume, do and undo our own life for Use general. We shall bring-in in us the fruit of the common work of Truth. We shall all earn in mutual way—the divine I's life general. To love is for general benefit. To love is commonwealth. To love is compassion as pure understanding. To love is Creation Grace infinite. 
He winning in us over the selfish state in ignorance finite, will realize in us the divine life infinite. 
Revived in all, shall be the real religious experience of Pure Faith that is free unconditional, true, that is order in us to see in us God's Life in use unselfish. One in all, shall we bring in new, the divine Theme of our Oneness-work in life. That is to live in Him unprejudiced, unat­tached—free. We shall earn to realize in opposition in reaction— the impersonal I in 

use and fulfil the real state in Being that is Peace. All shall be new when He in us winning in real human order in our own life in conscience—shall arise new, as state in Being that is Real as human life. We shall in us see, know, find the Truth-State established that is our Infinite I— the portion in us that is indivisible in I of Him divine. 
Real and unself-conscious, simple, natural, good, uncondi­tional in self-use unselfish shall we realize the new dispensation. This wonder of life real is in perpetual unfolding our life here in exper­ience. It is speaking in us anew. 
Life in Intuition is speaking in the Truth. We as His subjects do experience life as reaction infinite anew. It is here in us as the ordinary human sinner—that the divine life infinite is speaking. 
Shri Meher Baba in me is life in pure Intuition, He is me in Intuition infinite, giving-in in me Truth as scient order in conscience. Shri Meher Baba is in me in Being in action infinite—the impersonal life. 
He speaks: "I am here to give new life infinite. I am here to sow in you Truth in finite 
Experience. I am here to live in man the divine 'I', in use in Intuition. I am here mind, One, I, Truth—to give-in in mind, One, I, Life as use in­finite. I here say, it is my One-in-I Use in some of my own disciples. You as my own disciple are Use of my One-in-I-Word as work infinite. Life is work of Truth. One is work of Truth. I is work of Truth. I am in it—One-All-Work of Truth. This is to be shown to all who winning in I, sow-in in I-One. I am One-All­One—I in use infinite in mind in­finite of all who in Me win in I the use selfish." 
The evolutionary phase of the self-effect selfish is coming to its end. Mind as self-use individual has to resign. Mind has to win in the expansion in I infinite, life as finite Use has to realize in I infinite its expansion infinite. 
Shri Meher Baba replies: "This is and shall be when I shall live in mind in man—new in Verb. Verb is life in love, unconditional in all—that, I in all, shall awaken. It is to be soon. I here prepare the Way in all who in Me win the I infinite. It is to be seen, heard and felt. It is to be real 

MY LIFE IN BABA 
experience. It is to be Truth-Form in all in ordering conscience. It is here on the earthly plane that it has to react. It is here in the plane of life in ignorance that I shall draw-in in mind—Truth as state real. This I show here to them who owe to be my disciples by giving-in, in them conscious realizing reaction. Life is as it is—One. Mind is as it is—One. Truth is as it is—One. Give-in—bring-in— resign. I in you shall earn in One-in-All, new-Truth. This I here say, I sign as Shri Meher Baba to signify its real worth.'' 
One is in Him in love infinite, near to the Oneness state infinite established within since the dawn in creation. 
Love Him more than your own self, then life will be new, then life shall be real. 
The general state of life in the world, men have to endure. It is important to endure life as it is. It is important to resign to life as it is. 
One is important when one has resigned to life as it is. Being in it Self and no more human practicant of life for Use selfish, one is important as the fulfilling life within. 
To live is to experience and to 
over and over experience the divine life in ignorance. It is more than important to see and to realize the Use infinite of the passing phase of life that is inevitable. One is indivisible life in Intuition reaction infinite, and one is individual self-act in separate order in winning will in I as ego. One is self-act infinite as I as Ego for use of Truth. All in One, one is Use for use divine. 
In Truth reaction in Being as the show established within, one is conscious reaction of life infinite. One is divine order of life infinite in Use of its Use as individual; and one is true conscious free mind when in Use of its I unselfish. All is sure and new and true in us when we realize Life Real. 
Man is unsatisfied and un­conscious in I selfish. 
As Use in I, one is divine in Use. In mind infinite in Use finite men will be free of fear, free of prejudice, free of divine aim, free in the impure play in opposites, free of life as indivisible or as individual order within. 
In Him the Beloved in us in I infinite—we become winning order of Him. In Him we become unself-conscious of our 

own values, Unself-active in our own I as Ego that is Creation Play in Use of Him. 
Imperishable existence in all is He. He as man as Shri Meher Baba is free, unself-conscious in Him as life, as I, as Self, as One, as Truth Form. 
He is the magic order in us. His will in us is command. 
He is unconscious reaction in most human creatures, as in most men is the One as portion infinite, a state in deep unfathomable reaction of which they owe no cognition. Man is ignorant of himself as One. Shri Meher Baba as the One-All-One-I as Use—in use—is controlling the Oneness Strife in us that is our life in use ordinary and extraordinary. 
The apparent act external of Him doing and undoing, is real in order and in Use. He can create us One at will. He conscious in us, does in us act at will in every situation in life. 
We have no real free will. It is due to self-realizing, as act con­scious in us, in the self-state in self-delusion to think that one acts of one’s own volition. We as I,as Use infinite know to be free in Being and bound in I as reaction-
order infinite. But we realize that we sow-in in us One-All-One-Life and that is inseparable life in Being as Love. The inseparable life, we sow-in in wise ways of living, in wise ways of Being. It is insepa­rable in its own creation show as life of Love. We in our own man know that we owe to be happy in Being. Beingness is Love. It is life infinite in One All Being order. 
All in us is indication of this Non-break in Being. It is un­fathomable experience in us of Truth. All in us is living and Being in one-All use. One is in appearance I in separate order in experience and in the deep of our own unfathomable I infinite unself­conscious, one is the divine life, that is unconscious, unrevealed— but sure knowing state which He in us shall realize. It is in this half-life in realized order—that one is real and false and good and bad in one. The real indivisible idea of our One as Portion in I as life infinite—is to know in our One-in-I infinite, that one is infinite, that one is real. To say it and think it is one way to realize it and to say that it has been as it is is to have the experience in us of life infinite. 

(To be continued) 
