 
TO-DAY, as never before, humanity finds itself on the verge of self-destruction. Destroying itself with the very same instru­ments with which it sought to defend its material march. The End certainly looks very near. . . . Almost around the corner; unless some other force, a stranger force, other than a machine-gun or a torpedo, thrusts itself in this wild whirlpool of Victory and Defeat, Conquest and Collapse. This strange force which will hit the whole world right between the eyes and stagger it, is steadily but most definitely making itself felt through that Silent Man—Meher Baba. 
The whole world brinks on a choked cry, "O! God, anything but this". And when they say anything, they mean nothing but God. God, without whom the world was so certain, so damnably certain of creating Heaven on Earth. The world, in the face of the present upheavals, has lost that challenge, leaving every soul a cringing coward... Each awaiting the other to take a lead. Not one has a stout heart to shout from the roof-tops, "We thought we could do without God and His ways, but now, let us have Him again''. Each tries to don a heroic garb when his heart thumps, lost! lost! lost! 
That pounding, urging, sweep­ing, feverish march of humanity  towards better buildings and better livings, better roads and better cars, has brought nothing but fleeting moments of morbid satisfaction. And it took poor God so much of patience that He has at last decided to throw the whole lot lingering 'neath a 'Guillotine' chopper, which iscertain to come down any moment. 
But all is not lost... for we have amongst us a Silent God-man who had decided to give one more chance to this despairing world, through the medium, of a Universal Spiritual Centre whose foundation-stone was laid on the 17th December 1939, on a site at Byramangala near Bidadi station, twenty-three miles from Bangalore City; on which occasion the Dewan of Mysore, Sir Mirza Ismail and officers of the State were present. 

Why this Silent Man has decided upon opening a Spiritual Centre in the State of Mysore, after rushing round the world some ten times, is more or less the State's good fortune; which will boast of this unique opportunity of having a Universal Spiritual Centre added to the State's existing institutions of knowledge and progress, where men and women from all over the world will clamour to be with their creator once again and dwell in His glory that is lost to-day in Materialism. 
The State of Mysore, besides being modern and progressive in all its enterprises ... has a remarkable people. People who are free in spirits and free in thoughts. And it is through such citizens that a Spiritual Master can make strange force felt in this withering world and once again lead mankind on to better roads. 
Science has given us too much knowledge, and to-day we know that human knowledge has become too great for the human mind and to add to it the knowledge of Spirituality would really be 'the last straw'. But in this Spiritual Academy it would never be too great for easy communication, or else it would degenerate into exclusiveness for the very few; and men and women will not be trained with the windy verbiage of sheer spiritual philosophy .. but they will be made to experience it through sudden or ... gradual stages according to the individual's requirements. 
So much of our life is mean­ingless that we box with the din about us and within, thinking that there must be something vital and significant; could we but decipher our own souls. And this Universal Centre is there to serve your souls; Spirituality will not make you rich but it will make you free from this earthly bondage. To-day each is out to kill the other, and only desire co-ordinated in the light of Spiritual experience can tell humanity when to heal and when to kill. 
In this Academy men and women will learn how to put together the dismembered frag­ments of spiritual joy and spir­itual beauty and Bliss. 
And when this Silent Man speaks, one and all will feel that somewhere in the distant past all had the self-same spiritual longing which this God-man speaks of ... But none had the art or courage to clothe Spirituality with form and utterance. 

What criticism and opposition the Spiritual Master may invoke is of little gain to anyone with the slightest spiritual tinge in him. Do not mind whether He be good or bad; step into this Academy …. but think of Spirituality itself. 
