Shri Meher Baba 
AN INTERVIEW 
BY DR. P.S. RAMNATHAN, Prof. of Philosophy, King Edward College
   There are several factors helpful and necessary for the spiritual progress of an individual. Of these contact and com≠munion with great souls (who have pas≠sed through certain higher experiences which are not vouchsafed to ordinary mortals) is one. The ancients, therefore, rightly emphasized the necessity and importance of personal guidance of a spiritual aspirant by a Guru or Master. The rationalistic outlook of the present age has rightly become circumspect about the presentations of many who pose as Masters. But if this caution is overdone many an enlightened soul, who is in a position to uplift and ennoble the true aspirants, may go unrecognized to the detriment of the spiritual advance of the age. The true Masters are not desirous of gaining recognition for themselves, but are content to abide by the maxim, seek and ye shall find. Not to be misled  by pseudo saints, and at the same time, not to miss true greatness when it is present, is therefore an important matter which confronts the modern man. 
   It sometimes happens that one gets the unique opportunity to come into contact with a genuine personality advanced in spiritual evolution and, when such good fortune befalls one, it behoves him to share his experience with those who are like him in the quest of the higher things of life. It is in that spirit, I write the following lines. 
   Last December, in response to the kind invitation of a friend who is also a great admirer and devotee of Shri Meher Baba, I went to Nagpur to have the Darshana and the first-hand experience of the Teacher. It was a sight to see the demonstration of the simple faith with which a vast concourse of people gathered round the precincts and resi≠dence of Shri Meher Baba, hoping to get redress from their 

sufferings and misfortunes or seeking fulfilment of their ambitions and desires. They felt that by close proximity to the physical presence of the Guru they would get their wishes realized through the exercise of his spiritual powers. Watching the never-ending rows of people who came and touched his feet for his blessings one could not help feeling that the devotees felt their burden and misery lessened by the friendly attitude and cheerful expression written largely on Baba's face. Even a rationalist has no justification to deny to the simple folk this solace, even it be temporary. 
Besides getting two interviews in Baba's retiring room, where only a few select disciples were present, I also spent considerable time with him at the time of granting blessings, or at the time of Bhajan and Arti, during the course of his three days in Nagpur. The amount of physical strain that he had to undergo to get through his daily routine was indeed appalling. Still Baba went through it all with perfect composure and ease without showing the slightest sign of fatigue or listlessness. It was truly a tel≠ling demonstration of the conquest of the spirit over body. 
The never-failing expression of radiant joy on his face permeated the whole atmosphere lifting off the burdens of misery of the people who thronged around him. In his presence one could not help being struck with the spirit of common brotherhood that knit together the huge throng of people into one compact group without distinction of high or low. Whatever may be the psychological explanation of this pheno≠menon, there is no denying the un≠mistakable effect of his personality on the whole gathering. There was no awe or submission to a sense of mystery; on the other hand, it was an atmosphere of ineffable joy, peace and love all around. The quiet expression and the gentle smile, with a streak of sadness visible only to the discerning eye, seemed to indicate Baba's fellowship with the suffering humanity; and there was on his face a note of optimism that the op≠pressing clouds will pass away with the dawn of spiritual light in the hearts of men. 

  
   Shri Meher Baba has been observing silence for several years. But his silence is more significant than words could be. When one approached Baba he felt that silence is indeed golden and more eloquent than speech. It seemed as though Baba had adopted this method of silent communion lest words by their exclusiveness should create barriers between him and the devotees. The ocean of feeling surging in his heart would not be barricaded by articulate words! Concepts limit thought and focus our attention on narrow channels. Such fixed and exclusive moulds may indeed be necessary for specific purposes; but an all comprehensive spirit, with its spontaneity and freedom is better expressed by silence. Even as we find in daily life, words fail when the heart is full.
   Shri Meher Baba also impressed me with his intellectual depth and clarity. In the second interview I asked him what I regard as the question of questions concerning man's life and destiny. I re≠quested him to enlighten me on the problem of salvation by expounding  the true relation of the individual to the whole. The question was whether the final destiny of the individual could be realized apart from the universal. Without a moment's delay Baba touched his finger-board with inward assurance that what he was communicating was obvious and transparently clear, and the following is the purport of the interview. 
Q. "Has the individual any destiny apart from the whole of which he is a part? Is it right for the individual to seek private salvation? His fulfilment con≠sists in losing himself in the whole and living for it; and it seems that he can never be anything more than a part of the whole."
 A. "When we think of the individual we at once grasp it as something limited, so it cannot be identical with the unlimited whole. You are right in saying that the individual must lose himself in the whole, but the matter does not end there. We may compare the individual to the drop, and the whole to the ocean. The drop is separate from the ocean and again merges into it. What then is the purpose of its being separated if it is merely to merge itself again in the way 
in which it was originally merged? Evolution would be fruitless if we end where we started. The individual has to retain his individuality and realize his unity with the whole consciously. Thus Christ realizes God as Christ. You realize God as yourself. It is a personal realization." 
Q. "Is there any technique of realizing the goal apart from the total process of life itself? Are we right in giving more importance  to Knowledge (Dnyana) than to Action (Karma)?"
 A. "All Paths are really one. Karma yoga, when rightly interpreted, is right. There is no Dnyana without Karma and there is no Karma without Dnyana." 
   To conclude, the extraordinary charm of his personality, the joy and love radiating from his face transfiguring all those who came before him, his intel≠lectual acumen and the utter absence of self-consciousnessóall these have tended to make me cherish my visit to him as a treasured memory. 