
Miracles are the supernatural actions of Prophets and Saints. The miracles performed by Prophets are termed by Sufis as mojezat i.e. acts which cannot be imitated by others, and those by Saints as kashf (spiritual discernment) or karamat (favours bestowed by God). The manifestation of kashf by Saints is a subjective phenom­enon like clairvoyance or clairaudience, and karamat of Saints like the mojezat of Prophets and Avataras are objective demonstrations of superphysical actions which evidently override the laws of cause and effect. 
There is also a third charac­teristic common to both Prophets and Saints, and is termed khirqe-adat (habits). These physical habits of en­durance and suffering as a result of long austerities and asceticism are almost super­human in character, and defy all physiological laws of living and being. For instance, doing without food, water  or sleep, etc., for an indefinite period, without serious detriment to health and physic, comes under this category, and these, when demonstrated, almost approach the dignity of miracles. 
Although the orthodox hold fast to the view that the mira­cles of Saints are an enchroach­ment on the prerogative of Prophets, the Sufis concede that there is no substantial difference between the miracles wrought by Saints and Prophets. Like the Prophets even Saints have been known to work miracles such as walking on waters, flying in the air, healing the sick, raising the dead to life, appearing in different places at the same time, holding com­munion with animals or plants, turning base material into gold, etc. To take the edge off this controversy, the mystics who acknowledge the Law (external form of religion) have reserved the term mojezat for the mira­cles of Prophets and karamat for the miracles of Saints. 
Miracles by Prophets and those by Saints differ only in this—in the one the Prophets make a display of them openly, and in the other, the Saints observe secrecy about them. If this secrecy is removed, the miracles, i.e. mojezat and karamat, become identical in nature, just as Saintship becomes Prophetship when it is displayed. Prophets are avow­edly superior to Saints just on account of this display and for the divine duty devolving upon them after God-realization— that of inviting people to Truth. 

Although the laity recognize Saints and Prophets on account of the miracles they are able to work, but the workers of such miracles themselves attach no importance to them. The thaumaturgic aspect of Saint-ship is important only in the eyes of saint-worshippers. The great Sufi Qushayri has exposed the fallacy of the criterion of judging true Saint-ship from the standpoint of miracles when he said, "A Saint would none the less be a Saint, even if he were to work no miracles during his lifetime." 
Sufistic lore is full of sayings to the effect that miracles are 
comparatively of little signi­ficance and importance, and many Sufis have discounte­nanced them as being tempta­tion which is likely to sidetrack a novitiate on the Path. The great Saint Bayazid of Bustum once remarked, ''That while traversing the Path, God endowed me with many won­ders and miraculous powers, but I heeded them not; and when He saw that I ignored these temptations to self­aggrandisement, He made easy for me the task of attaining knowledge of Himself." Sahl­ibni-Abdulla said that the greatest miracle to be wrought by a Saint was the substitution of a good quality for a bad one. 
Hazrat Mohiuddin, when questioned about the real import and significance of miracles, came out with a very illuminating explanation in the following words: "Kashaf (occultism) is like catamenia in females, and karamat is like nafaas (the after-birth)." This utterance gave rise to a good deal of misunderstanding, and many have come to look down upon miracles (kashf-o-karamat) as of no account. The true meaning and signi-ficance, however, of the above utterance is this: Just as catamenia in females is a sign of puberty, similarly kashf (occultism) in a novitiate is a token of his spiritual adoles­cence, and just as nafaas (after-birth) follows child delivery, likewise the mani­festation of miracles follows realization (yaqeen). It can thus be seen that kashf-o-karamat (occultism and miracles) point to a certain result, and are not the result in themselves. Hence it is that saintly personages pay more heed to the Goal of self-realization than to self-mani­festation by the cheap display of kashf-o-karamat. 

Now here it becomes in­cumbent to differentiate and discriminate between the miracles of perfect beings like the prophets and Avatars and the occultism of those who are not realized but are stationed in the various spiritual planes. 
According to Hazrat Meher Baba manifestation of occult powers up to the fourth plane is fraught with serious dangers and invariably results in irrep­arab1e harm to one's spiritual progress. Even in 
the fifth and sixth planes, although one does not fall from these stations by the demon­stration of spiritual powers, still it seriously hampers and thwarts the goal of realization. 
The majority from the lower planes consists of yogis who are trying to traverse the Path unaided by Perfect Masters, and this class very often succumbs to the temptation of utilizing their occult know­ledge and powers for self­aggrandisement and cheap notoriety which ultimately spells ruin for them. Those from the higher planes fight shy of such miraculous demon­strations. Sometimes, however, they are forced by circum­stances to evince super-natural powers, but this very often is a forerunner of their dis­appearance from the scene of action on earth or from earth. 
The miracles wrought by Perfect Beings like the Prophets and Avatars have a divinely altruistic motive behind them, and they are both voluntary and involuntary. Voluntary mira­cles by Prophets are those which they deliberately per­form by the mere expression and force of 

their will, and the involuntary ones are those which take place independently of the Prophet or Avatar, by the ever active force and medium of Universal Power that he himself is. In this case the Prophet is unaware of the incidence of the miracle of which he himself is the original source and prime cause. In either case they spring from the highest spiritual and unselfish motive directed towards giving a general push to the world towards spirituality. With the yogis, however, the main spring of their action in this respect is selfishness of the worst kind covetting hero worship from the masses and all that it brings in its wake. 
An illustration would eluci­date the point under discussion. For instance, a child is holding a parrot by the hand very carelessly to the point of strangling it. Evidently to save the life of the parrot it would be inadvisable to try to snatch it from the hands of the child. By doing so, there is a chance of goading the child unwit­tingly to tighten the grip whereby the purpose desired would certainly be defeated Under the 
situation the child is offered a coin, which would surely make him relax his hold on the parrot and perhaps bring about its release. The offering of the coin is akin to miracles performed by Perfect Saints, and the desire to save the parrot from the death grip of the child is similar to the divine concern of the Masters in the matter of saving ignorant hum­anity whose minds and souls are denied proper expression by the stifling grip of maya— material desires and ends. This is the meaning and significance of miracles wrought by Prophets, Avatars and Perfect Masters. 
Such invariably is not the case with those on the lower spiritual planes or yogis of the lower order. A yogi works miracles from a selfish and base motive; for example, he utilizes gold or golden orna­ments to attract a beautiful woman. It can be seen that gold symbolizing miracles here is a common medium availed of by both Perfect Ones and the yogis with a view to attaining a set purpose. In the one case the end desired is the spiritual uplift of others, while in the other case, the motive is un­

alloyed self-aggrandisement.
    To carry the illustration still further, let us imagine a man putting on white spectacles which make him see everything around him white in colour, while in reality everything is colourless. A yogi here, while demonstrating his miraculous powers, would try to replace the white glasses with red or green ones, and to ignorant eyes used to seeing everything white, the result would be simply astound­ing. Such a cheap demonstrator at once comes into lime-light, and the ignorant are easily attracted towards him, very often to be disillusioned, per­haps too late in the day. 
A Perfect Saint realizing too well that even white is not the true colour and that everything is colourless, that is nothing, wastes no time over changing merely the glasses. He works towards removing the already put on white glasses, thereby enabling one to see things as they really are, i.e., colourless or nothing. Such a process is less demonstrative, perhaps slow, and works from within, and hence personified perfec- tion at all times in the history of the world has come in for a 
very belated recognition. 
It may he mentioned en passant that the miraculous powers of a Perfect Master or a Sadguru are the same as those of a yogi in the fourth plane. There is this intrinsic difference however. Since a Prophet or a Sadguru is all-in-all, his powers are his own—in fact he is the very source of all life and energy. He has simply to will it and the miracle is there. 
"Be and it was (kun-faya­kun)" is, according to Sufis, said in reference to these divine manifestations of power on the material plane. The yogis' powers are not their own; they have to depend on extraneous sources for power to work miracles. The inherent or God-given (swayambhu) powers of Perfect Saints—the Prophets and Sadgurus—are continuously overflowing, and these auto­matic emanations of power, the yogis or unrealized saints borrow and work miracles with. This is quite in consonance with the Sufi belief that the saints are Prophet's (Mohomed) witnesses, and that all their miracles—like a drop trickling from a skin full of honey—are derived from him. Although this belief, endorsed as it is by the orthodox Muslims, is limited in scope—as it applies only to the personality of the Prophet Mohomed—the universality of it is at once suggested by the Sufi claim that there has been from the beginning only one Prophet appearing from time to time in different countries and under different names. 

The Sufis also firmly affirm that the miracles performed by Prophets and Perfect Saints are really the actions of God. They do not perform them in their limited "I" state but in the unlimited state of divine "I" experience, when their indivi­duality is annihilated in God temporarily. On such occasions, their personality being entirely held in abeyance, it is the almighty power that speaks or breathes through their mouths, and carresses or smites with their hands. Thus miracles are nothing but God's actions displayed through Saints, and particularly, those miracles that are displayed through Prophets and Perfect Ones are certainly not accountable to the laws of cause and effect. 
Here  it would not be out of place to compare and contrast the attitude of the East and the West towards Perfect Saints and their miracles or claims. The East which possesses such a long and unimpeachable record of its familiarity with Prophets and Saints has come to accept it as a positive fact that Divinity which is Infinite cannot be comprehended by the mind which is finite. Human intellect which is limited in scope has its use only up to a certain stage in tackling meta­physical problems; but beyond that it is baffled or lost. And at the point where it gives up, it is love that takes up the link and finishes the research work towards Divinity. Hazrat Meher Baba has always been empha­sizing the point that an harmonious and equitable balance of the head and heart is a pre-requisite of a fruitful approach to Divinity. 
The West lays great store by an intellectual approach to everything and anything that refuses to come within the orbit of intellect it overweeningly denies. This unconscious habit of attaching finality to the verdict of intellect and mind by the Western 

world has been given a rude awakening by an American scientist who proved it very recently that "the average man uses only twenty per cent of his brain". Hazrat Meher Baba has declared it elsewhere in clear terms that science, in spite of its much vaunted progress, has not yet touched even the fringe of matter, let alone matters spiritual; and so long as it refuses to allow the heart to co­operate with the head, the so-called scientific progress is a chimera—a make-belief, and is bound to lead towards des­truction. And that is the situation that the West is faced with today. 
The West conveniently for­gets the fact that the East has known and practised mystical sciences for centuries together, and their scientific research has been in the domain of spirit­uality which is constructive and not in the realms of matter which is mostly destructive. The science which the East believes in and practises is best defined by Hazrat Ali, the son-in-law of Prophet Mohomed, in the following words: "The essence of science is the enlightenment of the heart; Truth is its chief goal; inspira­tion its guide; reason its receptacle; God its fountain head; and man its vehicle." 
It may be that some of the occult practices of yogis which pass for miracles with the masses can be explained away psychologically or scientifical­ly; but the miracles of Perfect Saints defy all scientific ap­proach at explanation. The factual condition of things, the divine miracles are there, and the ever-existing and ever-functioning heirarchy of saints in the world is daily adding to its number. Has science, one may ask, succeeded in ra­tionalizing the claim of the Christian world as to the im­maculate conception of Christ and his divine miracles, that of raising the dead to life, curing the lepers and giving eyes to the blind? The facts—the super-physical miracles per­formed by Jesus—are there, but they can brook no scientific investigation as to how and why they were performed. With all their wrong premises and material approach to things non-material, it ill-behoves the West to adopt a patronizing attitude towards the subject of spirituality, or feel scientifi­cally shocked over 

some of the claims or doings of Spiritual Masters. 
The truth of the situation is that in all that Perfect Saints claim or do, the world at large seldom gets a thorough insight into, and in truth a greater portion of their saintly part on earth lies safely treasured away from vulgar sight and curio­sity—in the breasts of a few deserving initiates. This regret­table but true situation is borne out by the famous Sufi Abulhasan Khurqani when he says: "If a few drops of that which is under the skin of a Saint should come forth between his lips, all the crea­tures of heaven and earth would fall into panic." 
It is wrong to misinterpret the sometimes apologetic atti­tude of the East while dealing with the claims and actions of Perfect Saints. This attitude is the resultant of long experience and familiarity with saints and saintliness and of the oft-verified knowledge that true religion begins where science ends, and when its chief prop, the intellect, gives up the job as hopeless. The West, too, will some day arrive at the same 
result, and develop the same attitude of mind if it perseveres in the quest and contacts more freely the spiritual East. The East, may it be said to its credit, has learned by sweet exper­ience not to deny the claims and actions of the spiritual heirarchy if it cannot see its way to accept or believe in them. 
In spite of the mass appeal that is inherent in the miracles and claims of spiritual person­ages, it cannot be denied that the East is very circumspect in dealing with them and allocat­ing to them their right position and importance. There is intrin­sically no difference what­soever in apraising the true value and significance of mir­acles performed by Saints from the early history of mysticism to the present day. One of the earliest of Sufis has declared that "miracles are only one of the thousand stages of the way to God", and the living Master of the age—Hazrat Meher Baba—emphatically affirms that "the greatest miracle a Saint can perform is to make another one spiritually perfect like himself". 
