Hazrat Meher Baba 

FROM A SUFISTIC STANDPOINT * 

By Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Some realize after great research, 
Some find Him without seeking; 
Some long for Him with no response, 
With some He ignores dealing. 


The Sufis classify saints into two main categories, namely Kasbi (self≠acquired) and Wahbi (Divinely or≠dained), as described in the first two lines of the above quatrain. This divi≠sion is rather arbitrary and is not the whole truth. It implies injustice and favouritism by God. This viewpoint is the result of Islamic belief in pre≠destination and the absolute will of God. Although well conversant with the law of cause and effect and the spiritual fact that nothing goes to the undeserving, the early Sufis under the aegis of a disciplinary church, could think of no better way of escape than fall into line with the orthodox men≠tality. They endorsed the latter's theory of Divine grace, with regard to saints suddenly lifted to spiritual heights irre≠spective of their previous form and life record. 

Evidently Hazrat Meher Baba be≠longs to the second category. Looking to the early part of his life as a student in Deccan College, no one would have marked him out for a spiritual career. Undeniably, really great events in one 's life do happen when least expected. And the unexpected, in the case of Meher Baba, was his memorable meeting with Hazrat Babajan (a lady saint of Poona) in the year 1913. One kiss on the forehead by the venerable old lady gave him God-realization (mushahida-e-zat) and the rest of the work, the return to normal conscious≠ness (mushahida-e-sifat) was comp≠leted by Sadguru Upasani Maharaj of Sakori. Hazrat Meher Baba, judged from the 

spiritual preparedness of this life of his, may be classed as Wahbi (Divinely ordained), but those who understand spirituality can see in him but a triumphant culmination of a long extended evolutionary struggleóyet another crest of a wave in the sea of cosmic consciousness.

 Hazrat Meher Baba, a Persian Zoro≠astrian as far as can be ascertained, is the only non-Muslim saint of the present century except Upasani Maha≠raj who has attained spiritual perfection from a Muslim saint. As if they would be anyway nearer to judging the stan≠dard of his saintliness, the Muslims very often inquire, "Has Meher Baba accepted the Muslim faith?" "Is he Bashara (conformist) or Bayshara (non-conformist)?" In this small sym≠posium, answering silly and sectarian questions like the above born of ignorance would be to no purpose. For such a class of people blissful igno≠rance would certainly be of more spiritual benefit than any frivolous and insincere attempt on their part to become wise in such matters, as it would react by making them lose faith in what they are already believing and doing. Herein our only concern is for the intellectuals and the self-styled Sufis who ought to know better than give an air of finality to what they already know. To such the study of Hazrat Meher Baba from the highest Sufistic standpoint, would be illumin≠ating and worthwhile. 

There is no measure as yet evolved by which the spirituality of a person can be gauged. The only material available is the record of the ecstatic and inspired utterances of saints, that furnishes a clue to seeking minds, for determining the particular state and stage of their spiritual experience. Very often it happens that there are con≠flicting statements coming from the same spiritual personage or between different Masters discussing a common subject or experience. The reason for a saint contradicting himself, is a sign of his outgrowing that particular spiritual experience embodied in his utterance. Similarly saints, giving a different ver≠sion of the same subject, is due to their different angle of experience, as a result of their different stages. For instance, 


an astronomer, studying the sun, from an observatory, would describe it in a certain way. This description would materially differ if the astronomer were to study the sun, by stationing himself a million miles nearer to it. Again the difference in experience would be greatly accentuated if the distance be decreased by ten million miles. The sun is the same, but the various stages of approach have caused all the apparent contradiction. The gnosis of self-realization, however, is never self-contradictory. Spiritual perfection de≠livering itself in any language and through any person, can rarely be missed. It is the highest Sufistic stand≠point that affords a rational approach to the understanding of Hazrat Meher Baba and his spirituality. 

Al-Quran, the first and last text book on Sufism, in the opening verse, clearly enjoins upon the Sufis to believe that the Lord of the universe has provided equally all peoples of the earth, not only means of material and physical sustenance, but also He has bestowed on all equal opportunities of spiritual unfoldment and growth. It is unthink≠able for a Sufi to imagine for a moment that the Almighty God has favoured one particular race or class of people to the exclusion of all others. The Quran says: "There was no nation but had its teacher." Again it says, "A Divine Messenger was sent to every class of men," also "Every nation has been blessed with a guide." (XXXV 24 and X 47). Hence on the authority of Quran itself, all Prophets and Teachers of mankind, belonging to any creed and country, have a spiritual status which must be recognized. Is the attitude then of the average Muslim and the so-called Sufis quite in keeping with the spirit of the above Quranic texts? Do they really recognize all teachers of mankind, besides the names mentioned in the Quran, as Prophets and Mes≠sengers? The Muslim world computes the number of Prophets sent for the guidance of man by Divine Providence, near about one lac and twenty-four thousand. Tackle any Muslim, well in≠formed in Islamic mythology, and he would find it impossible to enumerate and name Prophets from Adam to the present 





  

day, aggregating to more than fifty. Such illustrious names like Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Confucius, Zoroaster would never occur to them, as being idolators and Mushrik (dualists). Even if they do, the Muslims would maintain that the culmination of all Messengers of God is the final and perfect man≠ifestation of Prophet Mohomed. The Sufis, however, aver that the terminus of Prophethood does not necessarily mean the end of spirituality. If Islam, after the demise of the Arabian Prophet, has produced Saints of a high spiritual calibre, other races too have amongst them perfectly illumined souls. It is the free-lancers amongst Sufis, who have outgrown the devotional and ascetic stage and have developed a pantheistic experience, that have dared to utter the truth to those who desire to know and assimilate without being shocked. Syed Mahomed Husainóa disciple of Shah Abdul Aziz, when questioned about the spirituality (Fakiri) of Hindus and Muslims said, "There is no difference whatsoever in the spirituality of the two; the apparent 

difference is in the terminology." A visitor once asked Ghaosali Shah Qalander, "Sire, I have heard it said that no other race besides Muslims produces Masters charged with spiritual duty (AhleñKhidmat)." The Saint re≠plied, "True, the Muslims think that way, but other races also claim this monopoly. The truth is, all races more or less produce spiritual chargemen. The works of God do not depend on any single race or religion exclusively." 

Hazrat Meher Baba does not conform to the external form of any religion, not even the religion of his birth. The Zoroastrian world is indifferent towards his activities for personally discarding the external signs and symbols of their religion. The Muslim, very condescendingly, would guarantee Meher Baba spiritual perfection, if only he accepts the Islamic faith. If the Muslims are told that the Perfect Masters of the present century, Baba Tajudin of Nagpur, Sai Baba of Shirdi and Babajan of Poona were all nonconformists (Bayshara), they would say, that the said saints were at least born 


Muslims and as Qalanders (an order of unconventional saints), they are held excused from religious formalism. Hazrat Meher Baba says, "Religion is for man, but man is not for religion. I have become one with Truth; all religions are my religions and I have no religion." Bearing on this assertion, some ecstatic but irreligious utterances (Shathiyat) of perfect Sufis are worth recording.

 "One who is eternally in prayers (Realization) has no need of external prayers." 

óFazal Ayaz.

 "Ordinary people have to abstain from sin. I abstain from uttering 'La≠Ilaha-illalah' (there is no other God but God)." 

óBuali Sindhi.

 "One who has seen God, has overstepped the limits of religion (Shara), and one who has become God, has overstepped duality implied in seeing God." 

óYasin Bin Husain Razi. 

"One who is not for realizing God in this life, God occupies him in prayers and worship. Not finding such an one fit for knowledge of Him (Gnosis), God 

includes him in the common crowd." 

óAbdul Husain Muzeen. 

"Our primary duty (Farz) is to be God; our optional duty (Sunnat) is to be Rasul (Mohomed)." 

óAhmed Ghazali.
 "One who enjoys worship, is a 
worshipper of worship and not of God." 
óAbdul Rehman Jami.


 "Abstinence from prayers due to alcoholic intoxication is respect for religion; abstinence from prayers on account of Divine intoxication is res≠pect for Truth and Reality." 

óMulla Shah,

 (Spiritual Master of Darashakoh). 

The second question that auto≠matically follows is with regard to the quality of spirituality attained by Hazrat Meher Baba. Muslim Sufis would straight off class Hazrat Baba as a Mawahid (one who has realized Divine unity), and according to this viewpoint generally all non-Muslims who have reached the Unitarian state are styled as such. In Tasawwuf (Isla≠mic theosophy) there are two types of Mawahid (unitarians); one is called Mawahid-Haneef (informal unitarian) and the other Mawahid-tabay (formal 





  

unitarian). The former attain Taoheed unitaratian state without the inter≠mediation of Prophets. To them, com≠pliance to external form of prayer and behaviour laid down by such Prophets is optional, although at heart they acknowledge their messengership on earth. This class comprises of both Muslims and non-Muslims. Mawahid-Tabay (formal unitarians) consists of all Muslims who conform in all details to the external law (Shariat) of Mohomed the prophet. 

The above classification is rather vague and far-fetched and evidently dictated by expedience. Not a few perfect Sufis maintain that all those attaining Taoheed (Divine unity) through the grace and mediation of a Perfect Master, cannot but recognize and experience the spiritual state called Haqiqat-e-Mohomedi (the reality of Mohomed). This Haqiqat-e-Mohomedi is the name of a state or stage and not the name of a person, and this stage is open to Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Those stationing themselves in the stage of Haqiqat-e-Mohomedi after realizing Taoheed (Divine unity) are termed Ahle-Maratib (men of grades) and from these, Ahle-Khidmat (men of duty) on the earthly plane are recruited. Strictly speaking, a Mawahid (Uni≠tarian) is one who acknowledges and desires for no intermediary between him and God; no Prophet, not even a Master. Such instances are very rare and usually to be found amongst Yogis. There have been some Sufis of a very extreme type, who from the standpoint of Absolute State of Unity (Taoheed-e-Tanzihi) consider even gradations, con≠noting authority and duty born of Haqiqat-e-Mohamedi as falling short of the mark and not true Fakiri (spiritua≠lity). To them prophethood and duty seem an encumbrance, which they would feign do without, and the follow≠ing are a few quotations illustrative of this attitude.

 "My banner of Huyat (absolute one≠ness with God) is much more exalted and high than that of Mohomed." 

óBayazid.

 "In the path of Truth pay no consid≠eration to Mohomed, Abram or Moses. By all means reverence them, as they represent God devolving into man. Beyond this attach no more 


importance to them." 

óAbubaker.

 "La-ilaha-illalah (there is no other God but God) is Shirke-Khafi (latent duality) and Mohomed Rassulallah Shirke-Jali (manifest duality )." 

ó Fariduddin Attar. 

"In the prayers of Mohomed, the archangel Gabriel has no place; in my retirement within, there is no room for Mohomed." 

ó Ainul-Qazat Hamdani.

 "If after experiencing Zat (absolute oneness) one returns to Sifat (relative manyness), one does not know the Zat." 

óAbu Abbas Sayyari.

 "After seeing the light of Mohomed all believers Momin became Kafirs (infidels) ". 

óAinul-Qazat Hamdani. 

Now it goes without saying that if non-Muslims can attain spiritual perfection they can also make others spiritually perfect. For those who are interested in matters spiritual, they will find many instances of non-Muslim saints imparting spirituality to Muslims and vice-versa. Ghausali Shah Qalan≠der (1804-1880) had contacted nineteen Murshids (spiritual Masters), out of them eleven were Muslims and eight Hindus. Hazrat Babajan had two spiritual Masters, a Hindu and a Muslim. Sai Baba gave his spiritual charge to Upasani Maharaj and Hazrat Meher Baba derives perfection from Hazrat Babajan and Upasani Maharaj. It is thus patent that God and Truth is the heritage of the eligible and not the exclusive preserve of a sect or creed, as sung by the Sufi poet Jami: ó

 "Love's devotee, oh Jami, has no caste or pedigree. 

No special status has this Path, for parentage and piety." 

The wailing prayer of Dr. Iqbal "The Spiritual taverns of India have re≠mained closed for more than three hundred years and oh Saqi (cup bearer), bless the world once again by your Divine Manifestation" evidently calls upon a Muslim manifestation. Like the generality of Muslims, he forgot to associate Spiritual Perfection with the Qalander type Masters of the century like Sai Baba, Baba Tajuddin and Hazrat Babajan and other non-Muslims. Anyone taking pains to study the evolution of Islamic theosophy, would be confronted with the know≠ledge that there is never a dearth of 



  

Spiritual Masters and neither any de- The spiritual economy also is governed  

cline and deterioration in Spirituality. '  by the principle of supply being in  

Seek and ye shall find' is foreign to the  accordance with the demand. It is thus  

make-up of the present age which  evident, the world would miss the spiri≠ 

believes in advertised goods. Accor≠ tual millenium, if it were to look for it  

ding to Sufis, the end of the hierarchy  through sectarian glasses. Hazrat  

of Saints functioning on the earthly  Meher Baba, the Perfect Qalander, on  

plane will synchronise with the end of  all counts, is the spiritual index of the  

the world.  time, and if looked at dispassionately is  

The fact is the present age from the  assuredly what the world needs at the  

spiritual viewpoint is the Qalanderi age  moment, the common denominator  

characterised by irreligiousness. It is  who can be approached and claimed by  

common knowledge that all the  all, without loss of prestige, cultural  

religions at the present time are ex- and religious. The avowed spiritual  

periencing a wave of irreligiosity, and  mission in the life of Hazrat Meher  

the present Spiritual Masters according  Baba, the Perfect Sufi, can best be  

to the law of causation are the natural  described in his own words:  

outcome of the prevalent atmosphere.  "I have come not to teach but to  

awaken."  