A young boy, about twelve years old, was cross with the world for being treated as an outcaste by the people, and closed himself in a room. His youngest sister urged him to open the doors and come out, but he would not. The sister then sang some poems for him in which she said: "Since only One Self exists in everything, how can we be angry with any one?" The brother then realized the golden Truth in the above most significant words of his sister, and came out of the room casting off his gloomy mood. 
The boy concerned in the above conversation was Jnyaneshwar, one of the Perfect Masters of the thirteenth century, and his youngest sister was Muktabai. 
A gentleman named Vitthalpant was living in a village near Poona. Once disgusted with his life and not feeling satisfied with material plea­sures, he went to a sannyasin and asked him to give him the diksha (the vow of renunciation) of a sannyasin. 
It is a general rule amongst the Hindus that if a person has to become a sannyasin; and if he has a wife at the time of taking sannyasa, he must get her permission for the same. But Vitthalpant had not cared to get this permission, and had run away from home without her knowledge. When he went to his Master and requested him to give diksha, he also did not ask about it, and diksha was given to him. 
After some years, while the Master was visiting sacred places, he happened to go to the place where Vitthalpant formerly lived. There he met a lady in a temple. She bowed down after she saw him, and in the usual manner of saints and elder persons he conferred upon her a benediction that she would beget a son. The lady smiled at this. So he asked the reason why she smiled. She answered modestly that it was im­possible for her to beget a child, as her husband had become a sannyasin, But still he persisted that his words 
MUKTABAI 
would never be false. After knowing the full account of her husband and knowing from her description that her husband was the same person as his disciple, he at once went back to his place, and ordered his disciple to return to his place and remain with his wife. Vitthalpant at first hesitated. But he had to obey his Master. He went home, and the very next day he saw Shiva,* Hari, Brahma and Yogamaya in his dream. They said that they were all going to take incarnation through his wife. 
Later this dream proved to be true, and Rukminibai, Vitthalpant's wife, delivered three sons and a daughter. The first son was Nivritti—the incar­nation of Shiva; the second child was Jnyaneshwar—the incarnation of Hari; the third son was Sopandev— the incarnation of Brahma; the fourth was the daughter named Muktabai, and she was the incarnation of Yogamaya. All these children, being the reincarnations of the Perfect One, had spiritual tendency from their childhood. 
• 
When the last child, that is Muktabai, was only two or three years old, Vitthalpant's Master again visited him, and asked him to enter into the last stage of his life. He ask­ed him to leave home and pass his remaining life in meditation and trying for the realization of Truth. Accordingly he with his wife left home for the last time, and went towards the Himalayas. They went a long distance and reached a place at the foot of the sacred mountains. There they dropped their bodies and passed away from this world. Thus the children were left to themselves. 
Some years after this, Gaininath, one of the disciples and followers of Macchindranath and one who had God-realization, came to these chil­dren, and awakened the spiritual in­sight of the eldest brother i.e. Nivritti. Thus he became his spiritual Master. Later Nivritti gave his grace to his younger brother, Jnyaneshwar, who awakened the spiritual insight of Sopandev and Muktabai through his 

 


*Shiva symbolizes the destructive aspect of God; Hari symbolizes the preservative aspect of God; Brahma symbolizes the creative aspect of God; Yogamaya symbolizes that power of God which is responsible for the whole play of creation.


grace. At the time of spiritual awakening and God-realization, the eldest of these children was not more than fourteen years old, and Muktabai was only eight years old. As these children were born after their father had taken the diksha of sannyasa, they were treated as outcastes by Brahmins. But when they realized 
their  spiritual  status,  they  were  
accepted by them.  
Although  Muktabai  had  God- 

realization, she did not leave her brothers. Of all her brothers the second, i. e., Jnyaneshwar and his works are most famous. Nevertheless all of them had God-realization. The time when these saints lived was a golden period for India, for many other enlightened souls also lived at the same time. Nivritti and Jnyaneshwar were the spiritual masters of most of them. 
Muktabai was really mukta or free. She never married. She was quite free in the company of her contemporary saints. Being God-realized she understood the proper values of the things in the world. She did not want to teach anything new to the world. 
She was always enjoying the divine bliss and love, and in her happiness of being One with the Lord, some abhangas or poems have sprung out of her God-intoxicated state of consciousness. In these poems she has expressed the state of her mind after God-realization. 
The famous saints, Namdev and Janabai, were contemporaries to Muktabai. Janabai was a very ardent and one of the most loving devotees of the Lord. She has composed poems, and her style is very sweet. She was living with Namdev's father as his servant. But all of them being the devotees of the Perfect One, she was not treated like a servant. Still in her poetry she calls herself "a maid ser­vant"· (dasi) of Namdev. Namdev and Janabai lived with Jnyaneshwar and Muktabai after they met one another. 
Once when Janabai and Muktabai were sitting on a swing, they composed some poems. Muktabai says: "My vision turned inward, and I saw my Own Self where there was no entrance for the twenty-five elements. I have become united with the 
MUKTABAI 
Formless, and have begun my life with the Supreme Spirit. Now my mind is completely satisfied, and even at night I see the Light. All this is due to the Divine Grace of Nivritti.'' 
The theme of Janabai’s poems is that "there is nothing in the world except Pandurang, the Lord". 
Amongst the saints who came to Nivritti and Jnyaneshwar for their spiritual company there was one yogi named Changdev. He is said to have lived an exceptionally long life. It is said that every time he avoided death by entering into the state of samadhi.* But although he was a yogi in a very high state, he had no God-realization till be had the grace of Jnyaneshwar and Muktabai. He could perform miracles and also had many yogic powers, but his ego was still dominant. When he came to Jnyaneshwar, he received some spiri­tual instructions from him. These poems are called "Changdev Pasashti" i.e., sixty-five poems for Changdev. But he did not have much benefit from 
• 
the instructions which he had received from Jnyaneshwar. He was to get God-realization through Muktabai. It was destined that she would be his spiritual master. At last she gave him God-realization. The master and the disciple were highly talented, and both of them were also poets. Their conversations on spiritual topics are of extremely high order, and many a time we find them full of mysticism. It is very difficult to make out the meaning of the conver- sations at the first reading. 
After God-realization Changdev addresses Muktabai as his mother in his poems, and Muktabai also calls him her son. It is said even by Changdev him­self that he lived for fourteen hundred years. It might be taken as a myth, but he must have lived an unusually long life. Muktabai was only eighteen years old when she disappeared from this material world, and thus there was a vast difference of years between the Master and the disciple. Muktabai turned his mind away from performing 
* Yogitrance 


miracles. She made him realize that mother Muktai." 
miracles had no real significance. She says to Changdev: "Dear child, sleep in the cradle of my heart. It is beyond words—beyond the personal or impersonal aspect of God, and Muktai is singing you songs." Thus "Muktai was imparting peace to him by means of her divine knowledge". 
Again to her spiritual son she says: "A cradle is hung to the branch of the Formless, and there Muktai's son is sleeping. Sleep child; do not make any movement or a sound (be entuned to peace of Oneness). I am making the anahata sound by clapping (I am voicing the Infinite) 21,600 times. (It is the yogic number of tantric system based on Love and not on Pranayam.) Gaze your eyes (fix your eyes in communion with the Infinite). The Infinite State is neither of ordinary awake or sleep state. So listen, Changdev, do not sleep in ignorance, but awaken to the State of Knowledge." 
Changdev in his poems says: "Till today I was only a dry bone. My spiritual talent had left me for fourteen hundred years. But now to my great fortune I have met my 
It once happened that before Changdev had God-realization, he had been to see Jnyaneshwar. Muktabai was then taking her bath. When Changdev saw her, he closed his eyes by placing his hands upon them. After finishing her bath, Muktabai came out, and in the presence of her brother, said to Changdev: "Even after spending so many years of your life, you have not realized the Eternal Truth. The body of a man or a woman is only the outward form of the Soul. Those who do not understand this, only live the life of a frog." 
Changdev felt ashamed, and fell at her feet. He requested her to show him the Light and bestow upon him the Divine Bliss, and Muktabai fulfilled his wish in due time. 
Muktabai as well as her brothers lived a very short life. The eldest of them was only twenty-four years old when he took samadhi (passed away). Muktabai lived only up to eighteen years. She disappeared from the earthly scene at a place on the bank of the river Tapti. 

Her disciple, Changdev, took away from that where Muktabai samadhi (passed away) a year later disappeared. after her at a place not very far 
