
Chips	from	a	Dravidian-Wisdom Workshop
BY   C. V.  SAMPATH   AIYANGAR

 
I
THE HOLY EIGHT-SYLLABLE MANTRA
'THIS is the sacred Mantra,
''Om, Namo Narayanaya'' (eight- syllable	mantra).		Sri	Ramanuja- charya,		the	great		Vaishnava reformer		went		to	His	Guru Tirukottiyur Nambi eighteen times to learn this Mantram of Mantrams. At last the Guru's heart was moved and he gave Him the Mantram under a solemn promise of secrecy. But it is common knowledge what the large-hearted Teacher did as soon as he learnt this Divine Secret. I shall quote the beautiful words of Mother Dr. Annie Besant in this connection: ìIt is told of Sri Ramanujacharya that a Mantra was once given him by his Guru, and he asked what would happen if he told it to another. 'Thou wilt die', was the answer. 'And what will happen to the one who hears it ?' 'He will be liberated.'
Then out ran the devotee of
 
Sri Krishna, and flying to the top of a tower, he shouted out the Mantra to the crowded streets below, careless of what happened to himself, so that others should be set free from sin and sorrow. There is the typical devotee, there the Lover transformed into the likeness of the Beloved."
A great Master said, "You, if you would become one with Him, must be filled with perfect unselfishness and love also". Here is one of the most wonderful instances of forget- fulness of oneself for the sake of the work of the Beloved. That is why Dear Baba says, "True Love means the dedication of one's self or the complete surrender of one's self to the Beloved. It seeks the happiness of the Beloved without the least desire of obtaining happiness from the Beloved." As the Bible says, ìLove is the fulfilling of the Law.î
The  holy  eight-syllable Mantra
assures us in the words
 

 
of Sriji, that if we annihilate self we will gain union with Him. In this connection I shall give you an interesting, but very instructive incident.
Azhvan was a great Teacher. He was teaching his sons. At first he wanted to teach them the significance of this holy universal Mantram, but he asked them to learn its meaning from the great Saint Embar, When they were about to go, he called them and said, ''Life is uncertain. I shall myself teach you". What is the
 
significance of the first direction to go, and the second direction to stay and learn? It is a direction to all to understand 'Life' without any loss of time from the nearest Fatherólike a Perfect Master.
So I conclude this chip with the words of Shri Baba, ''You surrender your head to a barber, when you want to get your hair cut, till the work is done; similarly you must surrender yourself to a Sadguru (Perfect Master) if you want God- realization".
 
(To be continued)