Appreciation of Shri Meher Baba 
BY PROF. FREDERIK KETTNER (NEW YORK) 
   I have met Shri Meher Baba only a few times. But gradually there has grown within me the glad certainty that in him is an intuitive power, and therefore a high spirit, that will help the progress of humanity and the merging of East and West. 
Modern science has helped the average man gain comfort, but has fos≠tered narrow-mindedness. Thus we admit the originators of spiritual sciences which will open human minds, so as to give souls their due share of happiness and bring forth that urge for positive soul-betterment which lies dor≠mant in mankind. Modern sciences and spiritual sciences will carry on parallel to one another and form the track to world citizenship and to Peace. 
   The integration of mysticism, politics, ethics and economics into the new science of the life-eternal will originate a spiritual and ethical-social kind of engineering which will help to build bridges and thoroughfares between   man's soul to soul. Man must be helped to realize that the soul and the body, though entirely dissimilar, are equal, and that one is naught without the other. Separation of matter and spirit en≠genders the impulse for competition and war. The unification of matter and spirit in experience will bring the fruits of eternal liberty and peace.

   No doubt Baba as a spiritual engineer will attain preeminence. The world needs not merely civil engineers but also engineers of divine civilization. There is oil in the earth which man obtains and utilizes through engine≠ering. We must have engineers who can recall the vast store of energy buried in our remembrance primordialóthat is, man's urge eternal to mutual happiness. Real, spiritual benefit cannot be derived from magnificent edificesóthrough gilded priests or stately ritesówhere words are the law. It can be derived from the active reality of incorporating these verbal ideals into every day factors, actions 

and attainments. Only by bringing the eternal to its right place in our hour-to≠hour existence will man come to a new realization of his own depths and capacities, and so attain the stature of a new man of freedom. 
   It is my hope that the time is near when Baba will speak, so that we may admire him not only for his mystical unique-ness but also for his example as a new and inspiring educator. Thus he will step into his proper place as an integrator of ethical-social reason with intuition into world-conciousness. His teachings, being based upon the idea of God, will bring the new conception of manlifeówisdom or bioso-phyó to be recognized as the foundation for practical work with truth. As, on the basis of the biological instinct, there is wide-spread and wholesale instruction for war, so shall we have in the biosophical or the higher urges in man the key to education for character and peace. 
   It is difficult to attain that true liberty under our present social order with the windows barred. But the sacred cravings of man can be directed  to find, beneath the profound truths of 1ife, equality of wisdom, liberty of soul, fraternity in society. 

   I await, therefore, with deep interest the day when Baba's tongue shall give freely to the world the benefit of his deep understanding of truth and reality. It is certain that many among adults, and the foremost of youth, will greet with eager hearts and enfolding minds his teachings linking eternal reality and intuition. Young and old, who have not lost the breath of the inner simplicity of life, will come to venerate the flowing wisdom of this sage; and that spark will blaze up, to light civilization. 
   My hopes are that the language of a silent mind will be superceded very soon by the tongue of time and spaceó so that I may exchange direct thoughts with Baba rather than intuitive feeling. Then direct speech will enwrap us, our minds will mingle ardently and truth will spring renewed from the depths of our beings. We will work to make truth practically understood, so that life, based on the co-operation of those who whole-heartedly care for the highest in each other and share blessings and tribulations 
 
equally, will have a new meaning. Spiritual freedom of the creative soul will become the highest authority. A spiritual Trust of Co-operation, made up of all those interested in giving guidance and alleviation of sorrow and despair to an ailing humanity would fulfil my highest hopes. 
   Although Baba's silence seems at first to be strange, it comes from his ingrained motive to give something with inspired purpose, something new for humanity's needs. No doubt Baba will emerge from his obscurity to be a sweet relief from this world of "takers". Then will we see the sharp distinction between these "takers" and superf≠icialities and this giver of blessings; and his greatest gift will be his spiritual love and wisdom. Baba, who knows and is convinced that he reaches beyond good and evil, will teach how the God-consciousness can overcome the limited man-consciousness. As a positive super≠man he will show human beings how to make not a subhuman kind of living, but a super-human kind of life. 
   We have all kinds of schools and insti- tutions instructing youth how to make a living but few, if any, truly helping to make a happy life. Is our true destiny merely to struggle for existence? Baba would answer, "No". We prepare for a higher life. Man's aim must come to be the co-enjoyment of the absolute life-meaning, to be and to live in the con≠sciousness of eternity in order to find the fountain of youth. Baba will become a challenge not only to the intellect≠ualists, but also to the modern instructors who live more by bread than by the spirit of their innermost beings. 

The history of humanity can be likened to a great drama, the central theme of which has been emphasized by the great world-thinkers and world-teachers in their loyal devotion to the cause of soul-liberation. These heroic liberators will never be forgotten. Their influence will flow outward like the energy of the waves of the "eternal" ocean. Indeed humanity has been struggling for thousands of years to come to that self-knowledge which is the first and greatest step toward self-liberation. It has already progressed from barbarism to a sort of civilization. But it has yet to learn to seek 
 
the path leading from civilization to character-culture, if modern humanity is not to remain a civilized jungle. 
No doubt, only the power of true intelligence will help to overcome the unwillingness of the self-nature to obey the higher consciousness. But, let us not forget that just as artificial flowers resemble real blooms without having any of the true natural beauty, so there can be knowledge with-out wisdom and the vigor of truth. But once man's living and divine self begins to function, he becomes conscious not only of the existence of a visible environment, but also of the invisible yet eternal reality of spirit. Unless we become more interested in the depths of our true natures, we cannot realize what man's aim in life isówhat really makes life rich. And indeedówhat does make life rich ? There are those living souls who have the conviction that there is one force only which can do that, namely the love of God, or the wisdom of life. We need, there-fore, more soul or "Mountain top" experience to be able to hold on to such a viewpoint. In order to see life from this point of view, we must study it from the heights. And we know what to expect when we reach the tops of mountainsóthe drinking in of the rare atmosphere we find there. We must come in contact with rough roads, with almost unsurmountable difficulties, with innumerable trials.

   Have not the great teachers in telling us of their experiences spoken of life on the mountain heights? Sometimes we listen and regard these reports of the summits of truth as mere stories or fantasies. Yet, there are a few who do believe in the reality of such exper≠iences and who continue their own ascent. By continuing in this way, they finally come to realize that despair does not necessarily have to weigh down their hearts, that miseries and failures do not necessarily conquer them, because they can interpret life in terms of eternity. They learn that intangible forces inspire them, that higher minds begin to communicate with their minds. Then they discover that to be born and to die is neither the beginning nor the end, even though as human beings we must be born and die. They 
 
realize that there is a "beyond the finite," and that human beings have to learn to express not only their physical nature, but also the infinite aspect of their lives.
   Those who are not interested in self-expression are born merely to be slaves. Those, however, who know that the purpose of their existence is to express the reality of the infinite being, continue to strive towards harmonyóharmony as the miraculous understanding of their relationship to the highest. They are conscious of the truth that there is not only a human heart, but a cosmic heart, which is the golden key to the kingdom of Light, Life, Love, Liberty and the Great Laughter. They realise that it is not enough to be interested merely in the superficial self. They realize that it is more important to discover something else. They realize that it is more impor≠tant to discover something which we might call the Master Self. 
   Those who admire Baba for his qual≠ities of spirit and character know from the inner man that his teachings have firm foundation in the divinity of human nature. We must discriminate in such an extraordinary character, not between the animal and the mental tendencies, as in the average man, but between the mental and the divine capacities of man. We have the three stages in the progress of mankindó animality, humanity and divinity. Only the exceptional eliminate animality almost entirely. The real and true world-teachers come to remind us of the possibility of attaining the third stage of consciousness, the acme of human idealism becoming more aware of the divine or creative being than of the animal and mental desires and neces≠sities. It is easier to turn our backs on such realities as Baba represents and remain negative. But there are many who think of Baba as a lover of God and man, who know that it is vitally important to understand the individual before it is possible to comprehend humanity en masse. Those who feel and live the divine kind of life in their spirit, body, mind and senses can find the way to express the practice of heaven on earth. 

   Baba's message, being the 

expression of his character and spirit-motive, will differ fundamentally from the sermons of most so-called teachers who derive their motives from the personality-complex rather than from clarity of soul. As humanity lives more in the shadow than in the light of truth, we need the inspired Divinism of en-lightened souls to lead us out of the quick-sands of barbarism and humanism Who can doubt that we need a few giant spirits of the living truth who will help to develop the super-personal realities of mankind? Who can tell what the cones≠quences of a new kind of character and peace education of the few will do for the whole welfare of mankind? 