



Spiritual Anecdote 

BY Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

BONDAGE AND FREEDOM 

Four travellersóa carpenter, a tailor, a goldsmith and a fakir (mendicant) became associated with each other. As their journey lay through a dangerous tract of country infested with wild animals, at nightfall they decided to camp by the roadside underneath a shady tree. It was also arranged that each one of them should keep watch a part of the night against possible danger. 

The first watch fell to the carpenter, who just to kill time took a twig from the tree, and with a few instruments with him, began carving out a human figure. By the time he finished the job his watch for the night ended and waking up the tailor, he retired. 

Witnessing the fine craftsmanship of his previous companion, the tailor too felt like doing something to while away the time. He could think of nothing better than give an exhibition of his sartorial art. The result was a fully draped figure of a beautiful doll. 

The third watchman, the goldsmith, could not help being impressed with what the two had done. With a few beads and pieces of wire with him, he adorned the figure round its neck and arms with what looked like jewellery. 

The last one, the fakir, was greatly amused on seeing the beautiful piece of art, to finish which every one of his companions had contributed. At the same time, he felt depressed in mind, at the thought of his companions looking down upon him for being good at nothing. In this frame of mind he began to pray ardently, saying, "Oh God, my honour and shame is in your hands: don't make me look small in the eyes of my companions. Deign to put life into the image; you are Almighty and Powerful." 

The heart-felt prayer rendered in abject humility and helplessness was answered; the figure was miraculously transformed into a damsel, transcend≠ently lovely and beau≠


tiful. In the morning a battle royal of fists and wits ensued amongst the com≠panions, everyone claiming her for himself. The carpenter asserted priority of his claim, on the originality of the idea; the tailor and goldsmith based their claim, on the development and beautification of the theme; the fakir flouted every one on the ground of his miracle. 

To end the impasse, they all decided to approach the Kazi (magistrate ) for a decision. What a maze they found themselves in. Struck by the unsur≠passable charm and beauty of the damsel, the Kazi himself wanted to possess her. He denounced the claim≠ants as imposters and declared she was his maid-servant who was missing since morning. 

There was no go, but to approach the King, the final tribunal of justice in the land. The heavenly glamour of the beauty before him upset the fair-mindedness of the King. He declared the damsel was one of his wives from the harem and threatened everyone with punishment for molesting her. This was more than they had bargained for and a tumultuous uproar ensued. 

A sage happened to pass by and in≠quired as to the cause of the trouble. Taking in the situation he suggested that all should go to the place where the cause of action developed and where perhaps the tree may help a solution. 

No sooner the King, Kazi and all led by the sage approached the spot, there appeared an opening in the tree and the phantom of their phantasy disappeared therein. Thus eluded by the will-o-the≠wisp of their fancy, the claimants one after another sulked away crest-fallen. 

Such is the predicament of man on earth. No sooner he comes into his own, all sorts of imposters and claimants crowd upon him for recogni≠tion. The parents demand filial duty for his upbringing, the teachers insist upon respect to them for his education, the wife and children claim his love, the community his services, the country his patriotism and the Church its dues for saving his soul from damnation. Distracted and torn by different passions, to escape it all he takes refuge 



  

in death, but the remedy proves worse  Self. No sooner the part of himóthe  

than the disease. Thus caught up in a  Individual Selfóbecomes one with the  

vicious circle of births and deaths  wholeóthe Real Self, the erstwhile  

engendering hopes and disappoint- importunate claimants to his body,  

ments, seemingly eternal, he at long  mind and soul, viz., the kith and kin,  

last comes across a Master mind, who  community and the country, the teacher  

gives him the Knowledge of his Real  and the preacher, all vanish into the air.  