







Notes from my Diary 

F. H. Dadachanji 

TOUR IN INDIA ments and activities, particularly with 

Since the 8th of December 1938, Shri Meher Baba has been on tour in India with his Eastern and Western disciples, and when I am writing this, we are in the Central Provinces of India at Jubbulpore. 

The object of this special tour, as of all other movements and activities of the Master, is purely spiritual. Incident≠ally, however, it is meant to give his closer group a glimpse of India prin≠cipally of its spiritual and religious aspects, and generally of its myth≠ological, cultural, and historical side. 

The party accompanying is a cos≠mopolitan group of about 30, both Eastern and Western disciplesómen and womenóincluding those observing strict seclusion and discipline. 

The itinerary of the tour is unknown to any member of the party, except a slight indication of the direction to≠wards the South of India. Hence a blank page for all! 

CharacteristicsóThe usual peculiar≠ities typical of all the Master's move-such a cosmopolitan partyócomplicat≠ed situations in strange surroundings, sudden changes, quick moves, etc.ó are seen from the description given below. 

General routineóAs the ladies observing seclusion have to be beyond the limits of sight and sound of man, certain special disciplinary rules have to be observed for the strict enforce≠ment of the rigid discipline that has to be continued. Hence talks in silent whispers. 

A big bus is specially ordered and designed to suit the requirements of the party, with blue curtains and special partition at the back of the driver's seat forming a closed compartment for the ladies in seclusion; such is to be con≠tinued even under adverse conditions during travels. 

The responsible charge of driving the bus all the way is entrusted by the Master in the capable hands of an American lady disciple, who has been driving her own car for years, 


and has also driven Red Cross ambu≠lances in New York during the world war. To keep the car in perfect running order and also to help loading and un≠loading of the personal baggage of the party on top, two mechanical experts, specially chosen from the men dis≠ciples, travel with the party, on the front seat. 

Preliminary preparations were made a month ahead. Hyderabad (Deccan) was to be the first long stop and stay for about a month. Seeing different sites there and making certain obser≠vations for the establishment of the pro≠posed Spiritual Centre were disclosed as the chief reason, besides other im≠portant inner work of the Master. To make preliminary arrangements for the big party 's stay there, I had to go to Hyderabad thrice in a month. The prin≠cipal party who could be said to be chiefly responsible to bring the Master to Hyderabad, preferred, for obvious reasons of his own, to be in the back ground, although indirectly helping a great deal in making arrangements for the Master 's party during their stay in Hyderabad. 

The splendid bungalows situated at Shadnagar, about 25 miles from Hyder≠abad and belonging to Maharaja Sir Kishan Prasad, the Ex-Prime Minister of the State, are readily offered through the courtesy of the ever-hospitable Maharaja for the Master and his party. Auspicious beginning, indeed! 

A telegram requesting Baba to post≠pone the date of starting from Meher≠abad just for a day or two to enable us to arrange a suitable place for the party's stay in Hyderabad is replied with an emphatic "No", and a confir≠mation of the first order and arrange≠ment to be literally followed with regard to the dates of departure from Meherabad and arrival at Hyderabad. 

Only a day previous to starting from Meherabad, the telegram containing the contrarious news 'Shadnagar infested with plague' is shown to the group. But plague or no plague, Baba decided to go to Shadnagar. His loving group is ever prepared to follow the Master. 

On the night of the 7th, the two boys accompanying the party, get busy loading and fixing the party's bag-gageómore than 50 packages on the 





 

top of the bus. They had their breath out when they finished it after three hours. 

DEPARTURE FROM 

MEHERABAD 

Precisely on the day and hour fixed, at 9 a. m. of the 8th of December, Baba leaves Meherabad with party on tour. 

The big bus, with its extra-heavy burden of the party 's baggage packed and tied on the top, presented a sight of a huge unwieldy monster moving along the road. All who saw it were scared and were sceptical about its safe arrival at Hyderabad. "It would certainly be a miracle if this bus reached safe at Hyderabad," some who knew about motor transport were heard to remark! But safely it did arrive. 

The party arrive at Sholapur at dusk, and make a halt at the Dak Bungalow for the night. To avoid the difficulty of unloading and reloading the beddings on top, everyone of the group willingly offers to lie on whatever they find for the nightósofas, chairs, tables and whatever is available. 

Maya again! I come to Hyderabad on my third visit on the 3rd of Decem≠ber in advance of the party. The first news I hear on arrival is totally disap≠pointing. The grievous news of the very serious illness of both the heads of the dear family, through whose principal initiation and instrumentality all the arrangements in Hyderabad were made, was first a sad note in the flute. Then came the disheartening news, the "plague" epidemic at Shadnagar, for the first time in the history of the village, I was told. Several cases occurred which scared the populace, and the place was practically deserted. Maya again active, working with a vengeance to obstruct the Master's plans. 

But we had the most capable and enthusiastic group of sincere workers, deputed for us by the principal party referred to above, to make all arrange≠ments for the Master's party during their stay in Hyderabad. Their hearty cooperation and advice could not be too highly commended. They suggested another ideally suited spot for our party, with a spiritual background and history, at Maula Ali, about 6 miles away from Hyderabad. Here again the property of Maharaja Sir Kishan Prasad 


was available, and could be easily ar≠ranged and placed at the party 's dis≠posal. But water difficulty presented a problem, very difficult to manage! 

Meanwhile things looked very com≠plicated in Hyderabad. Those dear en≠thusiastic friends who whole-heartedly worked to make the Master and party happy during the stay here, couldn 't, out of courtesy, tolerate the idea of taking them to a place infested with an epi≠demic, in spite of the Master 's telegram to be unconcerned about it, nor was the Maula Ali residence found quite suit≠able with its water difficulty. They sincerely wished and worked to find a really suitable place for the party to live. Having rejected the two ideally suited places for reasons explained, it was difficult to find one to suit our special requirements, immediately. Two days of hard work brought no≠thing. There was only one day more left before the party arrived on the 9th. At the eleventh hour, after strenuous efforts all around, the ancient Gosha (Purda ladies) quarters of the Ligam≠pally Gardens are reserved temporarily for immediate occupation of the party on arrival. 

With a gentleman from Hyderabad, I go about 7 miles ahead to meet Baba and party. At 6 in the evening, we see a huge mountain on wheels moving towards us. It presented an uncanny sight indeed. In soft whispers, I speak to Baba of the arrangements made. When given the choice between the Maula Ali residence and the Gosha Quarters of the Lingampalli Gardens, Baba, for his own reasons, prefers the latter. With our car in front, we escort the bus to the Garden where we arrive at 7-30. 

After two days of continuous travel the party now enter these Gosha Quarters, with open compound, plenty of space and two suites of rooms on its two flanks, absolutely vacant with nothing to lie on. Not a very welcome and inviting place! But the dear souls smilingly and cheerfully accepted what was offered. Enlivened by the Master's humour, everyone, though tired, be≠came alive and gay, and the long-deserted spot is animated with activities all aroundóunpacking, unloading, shifting and arranging bedding rolls for the night's stay and rest here. 





  

Next day, Baba is taken round the city and shown different places. One of the good co-workers, a responsible officer of the State, spontaneously offers his own new bungalows just constructed and being given the last finishing touches, for the dear Master and his party. These were very splendid indeed and could easily have accom≠modated all, but being situated in a locality surrounded with other build≠ings close by, were found unsuitable. But the gentleman didn 't leave things at that. In the Master's presence nothing could dissuade one from further efforts. He had others in mind, but while driv≠ing in a certain direction, an idea suddenly flashes in his mind, and he orders the car to be driven to a distant locality known as Begampet, where the elite and nobles live. Baba's car, running behind the one in front, is suddenly ordered to stop in front of the gates of a palatial residence opposite the Jagirdar College, and it is the first of the two to enter the compound. This is taken as a good omen, and it proves to be true. The Master is shown around, and he approves. It is a palace, we are told, kept for the brother of H.E.H. the Nizam.

    An immediate shift is ordered. A gang of workers immediately start arranging things before occupation of the premises, the same night. The enthusiastic group of friends feel very happy at finding a comfortable lodging for the August Visitor and his party. 

Like Aladdin's lamp working won≠ders, the entire scene is transformed, and the group find themselves, at the end of the day, ushered into a magni≠ficent palace, with soft beds to lie on and everything around that a life of ease and comfort could desire. This was undreamt of and too good for a party like ours used to live a life of simplicity, and satisfied with the bare necessities of life. But contrasts are at times essential and beneficial, and the Master of Wisdom deliberately offers and arranges these to give his disciples an idea and experience of the dual and ever-changing aspects of life; to train them to take all these changes and conditions alike, always accepting and welcoming willingly whatever is of≠fered by the Divine Willóbe 



it a rich morsel, be it a crumb. 

During this stay, the Master wishes to spare the group from the usual household duties of an established life. A very dear lady from amongst the friends of Hyderabad offers, of her own accord, as a sign of spontaneous service to arrange for cooking for the whole party, in her own house and under her own personal supervision: a loving of≠fer lovingly accepted. 

The first four days, the group is shewn around Hyderabad, particular spots chosen by the Master. He does his own inner work, while the group has an opportunity to have a glimpse of the various aspects of life. They just touch these on the fringe for the time being, forgetting all their material or mayawik interests, except where they have something in common with the spiritual aspect of life or connected with the Master's work which they observe, through an intuitive insight that reveals much more than the physical organs of sight.

 While they were thus shewn dif≠ferent sites during their rounds in the city, there was something, they felt, the Master was working, silently in his own realms. 

Everyone was told of the Master 's intention of establishing a Spiritual Centre here, if conditions were found favourable and inviting, due to the high1y spiritual atmosphere prevailing in this environment. And it was no surprise to them, when one day they heard that Baba's plan had greatly interested the party of friends here who took up the idea wholeheartedly and offered to do their best to bring it to fruition, with the Master 's blessings and inner help. Some very interesting discussions were carried on for hours from the practical side of this ideal project. Some suitable spots also were suggested, and one was shewn to the Master, about 11 miles from Hydera≠badóbetween two lakesówith spiri≠tual atmosphere that the Master liked, and approved. 

A Western disciple of the Masteróa well-known gardening architect of Switzerlandówho was there with the Master's party, drew a rough plan of the proposed Centre from the points given by the Master. Not only was the spiritual nucleus forming the central idea of the unique 





 

scheme taken in with enthusiasm, but the ingenious external arrangements in detail to suit the different working de≠partments intended for the spiritual unfoldment and different planes of con≠sciousness were so vast and at the same time practical that would amaze all. No wonder, therefore, that it should im≠press all concerned deeply, and they offered of themselves to cooperate in the fulfilment of this great plan, for the benefit of mankind in general, and spiritual aspirants in particular. 

Thus, through this play of cause and effect, staged on a complicated checker-board of a variety of changes and conditions, Baba seems stirring some internal effect and force; and the plan of his universal Spiritual Centre seems to be the main spring of all. That is why these men of great executive ability and prominence in the State are enthusiastic to further this plan with the best of their co-operation. 

Suddenly, in the midst of these very interesting discussions of the big scheme, Baba gave all a surprise shock. Leaving all discussions and develop≠ments at this stage, he declared that he had to leave Hyderabad immediately for reasons of his work. If it was a shock for Baba's own party, to make hurried preparations for a sudden move, how intense would be its impetus on others who were quite new to Baba 's ways of working. They were all the time looking forward for a series of similar pleasant visits and interesting talks with Baba for whom they had all taken a liking, and were also expecting to bring and introduce some friends and other celebrities of the State and City, who would be particularly interested in the scheme, and who, in accordance with the custom prevailing in the State, were expecting the honour of a return visit by Baba. This sudden news of his abrupt decision to leave was like a strong blow that literally stunned all! 

In response to their repeated requests to postpone leaving even for a day or two, just to meet some selected few who would be interested in the great scheme and would be a great help, Baba lovingly remarked that he was going to Nagpur and Jubbulpore in con≠nection with the work of the same 



scheme, and that he will meet all on return, when called, after the important practical details of the plan have been worked out by those who had so lovingly and enthusiastically under≠taken to do it. 

Early morning of the 17th December, the party leaves the palatial residence that had been so full of life and anima≠tion, but for a week! Baba instructs the driver, for specific reasons, to speed up although it seemed risky for the huge bus with its extra-heavy load on the rough roads which were new to her as a foreigner and would not warrant speed. The Master 's order had, however, to be obeyed. Running faster all the way, they arrive at Nander same evening at 6 

p. m. just in time for Baba to spot a particular person in the busy thorough≠fare where he ordered the bus to run faster. A night halt is taken at the Nander Dak bungalow, every one trying again to make the most of whatever could be found to lie on and rest during the night, without their beddings or even rugs, as the baggage tied on the top was left untouched. 

Rising early next morning, all pre≠pare for another big run during the day. Baba again issued frequent orders for faster speed, for definite reasons, so that the party arrives at Nagpur at 7 same evening, making about 300 miles during the day, a very high average for a heavily-laden bus. 

That was the birthday of G., the wife of our host in Nagpur. The sweet will of Baba had it so well-planned that even this small human incident was lovingly taken care of, and her birthday was celebrated in her own home with her dear husband, who is also a devoted disciple of Baba. 

In Nagpur, Baba has a very busy half day accepting a few visitors for darshana and for talks about his work there. Baba also visits a dear disciple who has been ill in hospital for some months longing for a personal meeting. It is at times in response to calls of love from dear loving souls struggling in≠wardly for the Master's darshana that he goes to meet them, even diverting routes. There is another devotee of the Masteróan advanced soulólying in the same hospital and eager to see him and have his darshana, but 





 

for reasons of his own, Baba does not for Jubbulpore where they arrive the go with him, and leaves Nagpur at noon same evening. 
