  





The Significance of Love in Human Life 

By DR. C. D. DESHMUKH,  M.A., Ph.D. 

    Love is of two kinds, human and Divine; and human love in its turn may be conscious or unconscious. At the unconscious state human love is felt as a powerful attraction which never≠theless remains inarticulate and does not know its own true status, function or significance, whereas at the con≠scious stage it is illumined by the knowledge of its own nature and limi≠tations, since its hidden implications are all made  explicit by being brought to the surface and converted in a rat≠ional philosophy. Michelangelo's poem quoted above is a splendid example of an exalted human love which has become articulate. It expresses in ex≠quisite manner the pangs and the hopes of human love which is beginning to be conscious of the conditions of its frui≠tion. We have in it human love which is irrevocably implemented by the under≠standing born of itself, and which is poignantly 



aware of its destiny and keenly sens≠itive to its own limitation of duality. Divine Love, on the other hand, as revealed in a perfect Master like Shri Meher Baba, is the expression of infinity which has become fully conscious of itself. 

Love thus has many stages, and might for certain purposes be looked upon as a progressive stream ultimately pouring itself in that ocean of love which is God. There are two ways of trying to understand the different stages of love. One is the attempt to explain love by reference to the psychic factors which have been operative in the past. This psycho-genetic point of view tries to interpret the higher values in terms of lower values. The modern school of psychoanalysis represents one such attempt. The other more important and more fruitful way of trying to under≠stand human values is to determine their significance in the light of the many anticipations of the future. The first method of envisaging the question is akin to the method followed by the natural sciences; but it is for that very reason not sufficiently adequate in res- pect of mental happenings which are essentially forward-looking and purpo≠sive. Mental happenings like the ex≠perience of love have therefore to be understood through the other method which interprets the lower values in terms of the higher values, and which centres its attention on the ultimate goal which is being progressively attained through all mental happenings. If it is right to think of man as an evolved animal, it is equally right to think of him as a God-man in the making: and if it is right to look upon human love as a transformation of sex or ego-centric tendencies, it is equally right to look upon it as a reflection of Divinity. The results of the application of the first method have therefore to be accepted as being only partially true, and must be supplemented and even superceded by the results of the second method. 

As the higher forms of love are a fuller reflection of the Truth than the lower forms of love, it is not possible for us to understand the higher forms of love by means of our ideas concerning the lower forms of love, whereas it is possible for us to understand the lower forms of love by means of our ideas concerning the higher forms of love. The higher forms of love include within them all the really valuable elements in the lower forms of love, but the lower forms of love do not contain the valu≠able elements which are present in the higher forms of love. Hence a person who is not evolved spiritually cannot completely understand the entire signif≠icance of the love of a more highly evolved person. If he tries to under≠stand it, he has to depend mostly upon his own experience which falls short of what he is trying to understand, and therefore his understanding of the higher form of love remains imperfect. It is for this reason that Divine Love is unfathomable for all who are still in the stage of struggling with their limi≠tations. But a person who is eternally dwelling in the Divine Love has full comprehension of the human heart where the tree of love is still growing: and this comprehension is unparalleled even by the comprehension which a limited person can have of himself, since he cannot have real insight into 



his own potentialities for the future. 

    If we take, as it were, a cross-section of human love, and analyse the total psychic context in which it appears, we cannot fail to notice that human love is often accompanied by various limiting factors like pride, selfishness, pos≠sessiveness, desire, jealousy, anxiety, worry, etc. Love cannot take towings and soar freely in the infinite sky of consciousness, because it is held up by these strings of ignorance born of separative tendencies. In fact, modern psychoanalysis seems to emphasize that in most cases of love there is also lurking in the unconscious an element of hate which comes to the surface occasionally. This love-hate attitude has been called ambivalence. 

    Psychoanalysis for the most part ac≠cepts hate as an inevitable counterpart of love, but this view does not do full justice to the expulsive and purifying power of love. Love is the most dynamic power which purges human consciousness of all the grosser ele≠ments. A really sincere and intense love not only represses hate but roots it out. In fact it annihilates 



in the long run all ego-consciousness which is the very foundation of its limiting factors like pride, selfishness, possessiveness, desire, jealousy, anxi≠ety, or hate. Just as the moth drawn by the irresistible attraction of the flame enters it even at the cost of getting itself consumed, the lover who is drawn by the fascination of the experience of love gets merged in it even at the cost of surrendering its separative existence. 

The complex psychic context in which love appears need not however be looked upon as a merely negative factor making no contribution to the development of love. We might as well look upon the soil in which the seed lodges itself as being nothing but an encumbrance to the development of the plant. Just as a plant cannot grow without struggling through the enclos≠ing soil, human love cannot attain to full vitality and richness without find≠ing its way through the mazes of limi≠ting factors. The joy of freedom has to be a culmination of a long process of struggling with limitations. 

The very limitations of love thus point out to the beyond  which is limit-less. For example, hate which is usually looked upon as essentially opposed to love is itself like love in being in≠tolerant of the separate existence of the other. Hate is an attempt to overcome duality by subordinating or annihilating the other to which the self is opposed; and love is an attempt to overcome duality by losing the self in the life of the beloved. So hate which is the limi≠tation of love nevertheless accepts in its own way the objective of love, and thus confirms its own provisional character and the supremacy of love and its right to infinity. Hate (and its correlates) might be said to be the negative side of incomplete love, and it has no being or finality in itself. In fact, it has often been looked upon as a form of love itself. It has been called Virodh Bhakti (i.e., love expressing itself as hate). Hate is a sign of latent love and is its harbinger. In this light, Christ 's com≠mandment, 'Love thy enemies' comes to us with fresh significance. 

The factors which reinforce the development of love are many. The experience of joy in the presence of the beloved 



and the experience of sorrow in his absence both augment and intensify the fire of love. Another factor which in≠spires and nourishes love is beautyó not abstract beauty but beauty incarnate in forms. As expressed by an American poet, "Euclid alone has looked on beauty bare." Abstract beauty which is nowhere seen in any real form can hardly be the inspirer of love, excepting perhaps rare types of persons (like Euclid) whose gaze is turned away from concrete forms in search of ab≠stract and universal patterns. But for ordinary persons beauty can hardly be a potent inspirer of love, unless it is clothed in matter. Beauty as seen in the material forms is the reflection of Div≠inity and as such never fails to touch the deepest chords of the human heart. The lover, through his aesthetic per≠ception, has a deeper hold on the Truth (as revealed in a form) than a dry and a merely matter-of-fact person. This explains why, among the devotees of Shri Meher Baba, there are many who have developed along artistic lines. Wrapt in the contemplation of the beloved, the lover forgets himself  in ecstatic love. Beauty is the spell cast by the beloved upon the lover who thereby finds his path of love a joyous enter≠prise. 

To see things in their Truth is to see them with the eye of love. Those who look upon love as a conjurer of illu≠sions and call it blind have hardly known the deeper forms of love. The view that 'love is blind' leads to the shallow syllogism : 

Love is blind. 

God is Love. 

Therefore God is blind. The conclusion of this shallow syllo≠gism might be said to be a reduction ad absurdum of the false view that 'love is blind'. In fact true love (which should be distinguished from infatuation) is the insight which one soul has in the essential nature and worth of another soul. You have not known a person until you have loved him. Reason is the reflection of reality in human intel≠ligence, and love is the reflection in feeling. Reality has to be grasped by means of reason as well as by means of love; and the rational grip over reality would be feeble 



unless it is reinforced by love. Love is not only not blind, but is actually insight, and to say that God is Love is only another way of saying that God is Truth.

    What Shakespeare has said of mercy also applies to love:  

"It blesseth him who gives  

And him who takes. "

    The lover and the beloved have an equal share in the bounty of love. The give and take of love creates strong likes between individuals who tend to be unified with each other. This results in the sharing of each other's burden and cooperative life in temporal as well as spiritual matters. There is no such thing as an exclusive search for the Truth. Our destinies get inextricably interwoven with each other by the give and take of love, so that the progress of one person inevitably means some prog≠ress of others who are linked with him in love. This is the law of action and interaction in the unseen realm of inner values, and it is based upon the soli≠darity and unity of the kingdom of moral and spiritual ends. Through human love the veil of separateness becomes thinner and thinner. Genuine love always brings with it the sense of completeness, because it takes us beyond the self into the super-personal realm where there is an intermingling of personalities. To dwell in love is to step out of the limiting personality. When the individual realizes the perfec≠tion of human love, he might be said to be ready for being initiated into the final state of Divine Love where there is no duality. Human love is the equivalent of the Truth in the world of manifestation: and Divine Love is the Truth itself. 



.