

Man in the Making 
BY WILLIAM J. COQUELIN (LONDON COLLEGE OF MUSIC) ST. LOUIS, U.S.A. 
THE EXPOSITION ìLIFE is what we make it" is an old saying, this is true, however, in a very limited sense only, as behind it is "That Destiny which shapes our end, roughew it as we may." 
It is to this evolutionary process of growth and development we must look to learn what is taking place under the surface. 
Philosophers have distinguished the phases of life in its material, psychic and spiritual aspects, and called them body, soul and spirit; the finite, indefinite and infinite. 
The Shankhya Philosophy knows them as Svapna, Shushupti and Samadhi. In Sufism they are known as Nasut, the physical plane; Malakut, the sphere of thought and imagination, and Djabrut, the sphere in which the soul is at home. 
In the Hermetic Philosophy, they are called the animal, human and Daimonic states. 
They are symbolically rendered in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, by the passage, Grand Gallery and King's Chamber. 
Balzak refers to them in his "Louis Lambert" as instinctive, in which man is below the level; abstractive, in which he attains to it, and Specialism, in which the Infinite dawns upon him. The instinctive desires deeds, the abstractive terms to ideas; the Specialist sees the end, he aspires to God, whom he inwardly perceives or contemplates. 
Abdul Baha explains it as follows: ''When we ponder over the Microcosm, its reality, we find that man is endowed with an outer or physical reality. It belongs to the material realm, the animal kingdom, because it has sprung from the material world. This animalistic reality he shares with the animals. The human body, like that of the animals, is subject to nature's law. But man is endowed with a second 

reality, the rational or intellectual; and the intellectual reality of man predominates over nature. 
All these sciences which we enjoy were hidden and recondite secrets of nature, unknowable to nature, but man was enabled to discover these mysteries, and out of the plane of the unseen he brought them out into the plane of the seen. Thus while man's physical reality is captive to nature, man is the governor of nature through his intellectual power. 
Yet there is a third reality in man, the spiritual reality. Through its medium one discovers spiritual revelations, a celestial faculty which is infinite as regards the intellectual as well as physical realms. That power is conferred upon man through the breath of the Holy Spirit. It is an eternal reality, an indestructible reality, a reality belonging to the Divine, supernatural kingdom; a, reality whereby the world is illumined, a reality which grants unto man eternal life. 
This third spiritual reality it is which discovers past events and looks along the vistas of the future. It is the ray of the Sun of reality. The Spiritual 
world is enlightened through it, the whole of the Kingdom is being illumined by it. It enjoys the world of beatitude, a world which had no beginning and which shall have no end. That celestial reality, the third reality of the microcosm, delivers man from the material world. Escaping, he will find an illuminating reality, transcending the limited reality of man, and causing him to attain to the infinitude of God, abstracting him from the world of superstitions and imaginations, and submerging him in the sea of the rays of the Sun of reality.'' 
THE KEY Although I know the fore≠going to be true from personal experience, yet I recognise the justifiable skepticism of the intellectual. Where there is an end to be achieved, there must of necessity be ways and means to that end, and when this process is understood, all fallacies of creeds and dogmas will have been permanently eliminated. Evolution involves the whole of the Universe, but we will limit ourselves to our own environ≠ment comprising the 

MAN IN THE MAKING 
mineral, vegetable, animal, and human kingdoms. 
As order, form and system are the earmarks of intelligence, we may expect them to be charac≠teristics of this process. 
As science is the analysis of the concrete details of natural phenomena, metaphysics and psychology the bridge that leads into the abstract synthax of philosophy, we may draw our information from all three as far as they go. 
The system employed by nature has three aspects, which are different versions of the same thing; the mathematical, which is written about in "Moore's Algebra", the Harmonic, with which I am more familiar, and the Geometrical, as rendered in ''Geometrical Psychology", by an author whose name I have forgotten. 
The first law is that of Degrees, "discrete degrees", as Sweden≠borg would call them. 
The relationship of these degrees to each other is that of the octave, and, like the octave, there is a continuous scale from one to the next. 
The degrees, however, are not part of the scale as in music. It is like the spectrum which gives the whole gamut of color, yet the sunlight from which they are derived is itself invisible. 
So it is with matter, which, according to its atomic number form the spectra or gamuts, while ether is the primordial source from which it emanates as an atomic nucleus. 
Their place in the scale is denoted by their qualities, attributes and forms, as given in the Mendeljef spiral. 
Here we have the "Forms, series and degrees'' as first enunciated by Dr Andrew J. Davis in the middle of last century. 
There is one more law to be considered, i.e., that of Harmony, or rather Harmonics, which is at the bottom of all affinity, whether chemical or human. 
The relation of matter to ether as is that of the spectrum to sunlight, is like the relation of color to white. White is the WHOLE while its refraction is the whole in its constituent parts. 
This gives us the entire varied multiplicity of the material universe, and in a 

higher degree that of the vegetable, animal and human kingdoms. 
The basic urge in all cases is a trend back to the primor≠dial state, or conformity to it. 
Since the primordial condition was white, and the series colored, the most stable conditions are those in which the white or stable condition is most simply attained, in other words where an element associates with its complemcnt, the stability being in direct proportion to the complete≠ness of the adaptation. 
These associations occur subject to the law of Harmonics. 
An octave has twice the frequency of the funda≠
mental and half the wave≠length. The harmonic series running as it does like the common numbers 12345678 etc. is better understood when separated as octives. 
If one is a note or color, say C or red, two will be the octave, also C or red, but with double the frequency and half the wave-length. 
The logarithmic mantissa of an octave is 301. By dividing a circle into 301 parts, the musical scale or color spectrum can be laid out according to frequency or wavelength. This unit is called Savart. 
This will enable us to find the colors that correspond to the harmonics in music. 

(To be continued) ñññññññññññ 
