




Hazrat Sai Baba of Shirdi* 

BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

 Hazrat Sai Baba (1856-1918), al≠though an outstanding figure of the saintly hierarchy of th e last and the present century, like the majority of his kind, leaves behind no authentic record of his antecedents and early h istory. This may sound strange to historians of this our age who allow no unique incident or a great personage to pass away unrecorded. But saints are a class by themselves, and baffle both the historian and the biographer who naturally wonder at the paucity of per≠sonal information to be gleaned about saintly personalities like Sai Baba, in spite of their spiritual reputation and large following. In order to understand this seeming anomaly, the conditions governing the m utual approach of a saint and a devotee m ust be borne in mind. In the eyes of a devotee a saint: 

   Is not a person but a personality; 

   Is not a preacher but a teacher; 

Is not what he was but what he is; 

Is not one who hopes for but achieves; 

    Is not one who promises but gives. 

The saint also typifies a st ate of spiritual being that: 

   Is never concerned with the past or future, but lives and works in the active present; 

    Is not concerned with the problems of the hereafter, but is f or the solution of the riddle of life here and now; 

    Is not concerned with what a disciple possesses, but is alive to what he sur≠renders; 

    Is not concerned with the seeker 's impersonal faith and belief, but takes cognisance of his pe rsonal actions and motives. 

    Thus it is tha t a saint is inv ariably never communicative with regard to his personal antecedents, and the devotee is less inquisitive in such matters, 


feeling convinced that the grace of a saint is to be induced by service and love alone and not by know≠ledge of personal facts and history concerning him. This state of af≠fairs is particularly true of Muslim saints, and the only personal information that is d eemed worth≠while knowing is th e saint 's spiri≠tual lineage, the Murshid (Master) and his Order of Sufis m, which details greatly help in determining the quality and pote ntiality of his gnosis (Irfan). 

Like others of his class, the birth and parentage of Ha zrat Sai Baba also is lost in obscurity and has given rise to conflicting conjec≠tures in this respect, particularly so amongst his Hindu adm irers and devotees. One sect ion* considers him to be born of B rahmin parents brought up by a Muslim faqir, and anotherÜ affirms unequivocally that he was Muslim born. The fact, however, is that Sai Baba w as a Muslim by birth, and the presence of a temple near to a m osque at Shirdi, brought into being by S ai Baba, was out of deference to his Hindu Guru (Master) Gopalrao Deshmukh. 

Hazrat Sai Baba hails from Selu, a village in Jan tur Pargana, Niz≠am's Dominions, and passed his early childhood ne ar about Auran≠gabad. Sai Baba 's parents were very poor, and the cruel hand of death having removed the paternal pro≠tection, the m other took to m endi≠cancy for a livelihood. W hile begging her way through life, she (the mother) happened to come to Shelwadi to the hou se of Gopalrao Deshmukh with her son, aged f ive years, who wa s destined to be our future Sai Baba. Gopalrao, the re≠nowned saint of the place, was at once struck by the s piritual potentiality of the child, and very lovingly offered both the m other and the son pr otection and shel ter which they sorely needed. 

A short account of the ante≠cedents of Gopalrao who initiated Sai Baba into the spiritual path would not be am iss here. Gop≠alrao's father, Kesh avpant, was extraordinarily religious-minded, and, as is usu al with suc h beings, penury and want dogged his 

footsteps. The only valuable property which he w as proud to possess in the world was the household deity, Shri Vyankatesh, whom he worshipped very regularly and devoutly. When Gopalrao grew up, h is birthplace, Jamb, offered no prospects of a decent and honour≠able living, and the chronic poverty of the family compelled him to migrate to a nearby district where he selected the village Shelwadi as the venue of his future enterprise. 

    Religiosity being in his blood, Go≠palrao soon estab lished his reputation as a very high-m inded and spiritually attuned soul. In course of tim e, the Government, also in recognition of his humanitarian activities, gifted him the village of Shelwadi as Jahagir (here≠ditary tenure of land). The severity of his asceticism may be gauged from the following incident related about him : Once, when having an outing, his eyes fell on a beautiful woman, giving rise to evil thoughts in his mind. He at once retraced his steps hom e, and, standing before the deity Shri Vyankatesh, pierced both the eyes blind with an iron poker. This incident, w hen it cam e to be known, enhanced considerably his inner light and also his outer reputation in the world. It is said of him, that after this self-inflicted blindness, Bhagwan (Shri Vyankatesh) would him self ar≠range for him the cerem onial para≠phernelia of worship at puja (prayer) time. Such miraculous incidents carried Gopalrao's spiritual rep utation far and wide, and Shelwadi becam e a place of pilgrimage for people high and low. 

    The loving care of a Master like Gopalrao is the on ly solace-giving factor left to Sai Baba, when at the age of 12 the mother also departs from the world, leaving him a complete orphan. This last link with the material world having been snappe d, the orphan boy was unconsciously drawn m ore and more close towards Gopalrao who made no s ecret of his special predi≠lection for him . This unreserved love and attraction towards Sai Baba rou sed the ire and jealousy o f the Brah min followers of Gopalrao, and they all resented in no unm istakable terms the preferential treatment accorded to a Muslim boy by their Master who was a Brahmin. An innocent creature of the situation, Sai Baba cam e in for a good deal of persecution and harass≠ment by the local populace. 



The Guru (Master) and the chela (disciple) went about their work un≠perturbed, and adopted a very tolerant attitude towards the m isguided malefactors of the village. Matters came to a head when a few fanatics decided to do away with the Mus lim disciple who, as they thought, monopolised the favours of the Brahmin Master. With that end in v iew some fire-brands of the place follow ed Gopalrao and Sai Baba into th e jungle outside Shelwadi which both of t hem used to frequent very often in each other's company. Finding them asleep underneath a shady tree, they approached them stealthily, and one of them aimed a big piece of stone at the sleeping boy 's head. Happily the deadly missile missed its mark, and instead of hurting Sai Baba , it hit the Ma ster Gopalrao Deshmukh resting by his side. 

This was too much for  Sai Baba to put up with, and out of sheer love for his Master who had to suffer so much for his sake, he begged perm ission of Gopalrao to be allowed to leav e him and go elsewhere. Gopalrao, however, would hear of no such thing, and pacified the loving disciple by saying, "I have this day decided upon you as my sole chargem an, and one day you will succeed to my spiritual heritage."

   It is universally admitted that spiri≠tual personages never have recourse to retaliation or revenge, either physically or even m entally, for whatever perse≠cution they undergo at the hands of ignorant people. Prophet Moham ed prayed for more light to the enem y res≠ponsible for the loss of his tooth in one of his early conflic ts with his pe rse≠cutors, and Lord J esus, while being crucified, said: "O Lord, forgive them; they know not what they do." And yet there are numerous instances of people coming to harm as a result of th eir misbehaviour towards saints and prophets. Why is this so when the light of spirituality bears no ill-will towar ds the darkness of ignorance? The reason is not far to seek. The physical presence of a Perfect Master is the focal point round which divine powersó shaktisó (which the orthodox personify as angels) are very active, and react v ery forcibly to good or bad thoughts and deeds. It is these div ine entities rou nd the personality of a saint that respond very quickly and ruthlessly, yielding results good or bad according to the stimulous imparted. Such results, good or bad, accrue to people oftentim es unknown to the saint him self, and the laity term these as m iracles. To this effect there is a dictum among Sufis which says: "With God (impersonal) do what you dare; but with saints forsooth beware. " 



   This dictum stands verified In the case of the m iscreant who threw the stone at Gopalrao with m urderous intent. The man was taken ill, and after a few days died. The people of the town were awe-stricken, and the death of the man under the circumstances was inter≠preted as a m iracle in vindication of Gopalrao's spiritual status. The relations of the deceased approached Gopalrao, and prostrating before him begged to be forgiven    for    misunderstanding his saintliness. Furthermore all of them invoked Gopalrao 's divine m ercy for restoring the dead culprit to lif e. Gopalrao very benignly evaded this request by saying, "I am one like any of you, and have no such divine powers that you attribute to m e," and pointing towards Sai Baba suggestively added, "That Muslim boy may perhaps do something in the matter." Sai Baba, finding the question being referred to him by the Maste r, confidently took a little dust off the f eet of Gopalrao a nd applied it to the dead body, and m ira≠culously the man came to lif e. This incident greatly impressed the populace and brought to light the true spiritual relationship between the Brahm in Master and the Muslim disciple. In token of their regenerated bhakti and faith in Gopalrao the people arranged a great ceremonial function. The Guru and the chela were taken out in a pro≠cession, and thousands paid hom age to them. 

    The death of Gopalrao took place under circumstances strangely touch≠ing. Although he had declared it off and on that he would soon be discarding his earthly existence, nobody took him very seriously. One day he gathered the mandali round him and declared it was time for him to go. Having finished his daily bath, sandhya (prayers) and the recital of Gita, he beckoned to Sai Baba to approach him. When the latter went near him, Gopalrao presented him his wearing apparel (dhotar), and deliver≠ing his last serm on to those around gave up the ghost.  



    The gift of clothing by Gopalrao was symbolic of the transference of spiritual charge to Sai Baba. The old and w orn out clothing, the sp iritual significance of which only Sai Baba new, he tailor≠ed it into a wrapper for the head an d an apron (kafni) to drape the body. 

    Soon after the dem ise of Gopralrao, Sai Baba who was now sixteen years of age left Shelwadi with the m arriage party of a Moham edan Patel bound for Shirdi. He did not stay here for long, and again took to a wandering life of a faqir (mendicant). In th is itinerary Sai Baba retired into a cave in a mountain            near Aurangabad (Nizamís Domin≠ions), and p ractised severe asceticism, going without food a nd water for a number of years. Thereafter he con≠tacted another saint* near Akkalkot who helped him to regain norm al consciousness. 

   At the age of twenty Sai baba once again returned to Sh irdi, this time to stay permanently. He w as very ascetic in his habits, and was extrem ely indif≠ferent to bodily requirements and com≠forts. For a period he passed his nights underneath a margosa (neam) tree, but later took up his residence in the local mosgue. In the beginning he led a very secluded life and avoided com pany, only emerging now and then to play the Samaritan amongst the poor villagers whose bodily ailments he tried to cure without remuneration, with a working knowledge of Indian herbs and drugs that he possessed. The necess ary but meager food for the sustenance of the body he sought by daily begging at only five different houses by uttering in 

the Marathi language the words "mai bhakar wadha" (mother, give a little bread), as most of the villagers were Hindus. 

    This daily programme of begging at five different houses with the peculiar slogan, "mother, give a little bread", Sai Baba kept up to the end of his days, and this, according to Hazrat Meher Baba, possessed deeper sig nificance than what meets the ey e from the outward act characteristic of a m endicant. Sai Baba's every act and move ment pos≠sessed a spiritual significance depicted in numbers, and here the five houses he made a poi nt of visiting daily were symbolic of the five Perfect Mas ters (Sadgurus) of all tim es at whose doors the whole u niverse is s upplicating for spiritual salvation or material welfare. 

Whilst begging for food as stated above, Sai Baba would very often stop for urination anywhere, oblivious to the people and surroundings, and the most awkward and funny part thereof was that he would invariably give seven jerks to the genitals during the ac t of micturition, thereby indicating that the seven spiritual planes were com pletely under his control and command. 

Whilst answering the call of nature, he would spend several hours in the lavatory. When later his saintly reputa≠tion was f irmly established and at≠tracted a la rge following of adm irers and devotees, the daily visit to the lavatory became quite a ce remonial affair. At a fixed hour daily Sai Baba used to visit the "Lendi" as the lavatory was called by him , accompanied by a few people, with the village band playing music as loud as possible. Ex≠plaining this apparently eccentric vein in Sai Baba, Hazrat Meher Baba gave a very illuminating explanation: "Perfect Masters who control and direct the spiritual and material welfare of the universe, usually do so through their agents who are scattered in different parts of the world and who hold different spiritual jurisdictions in accordance with their s piritual status. Some of these agen ts from the higher planes are vaguely conscious of the source of directions and orders that they carry out, but the majority of those from the lower planes are unaware of the s ource of the orders from which they im plicitly and a uto≠matically carry out. It is for this reason that many of those from the diffe rent planes who are known and worshipped as saints cannot and do not recognise the Sadgurus or Perfect Masters who direct and control the affairs of the universe. To come to the point under discussion, Perfect Masters lik e Sai Baba, whilst engaged in the act of evacuating the bowels, at such a tim e dispense altogether with the ag ency of saints and directly control the universe. Believe it or not, it is possible for Sad-gurus, while thus engaged, to deter≠mine and c alculate numerically all the forms and stages of the evolving crea≠tion in detail." 



    Because of his wandering habits and baffling moods Sai Baba cam e to be known at Shirdi as a "m ad faqir". He was chary of com pany, and the only people whom he contacted were of a saintly character. At first the people of Shirdi found it difficult to understand him, and  treated him indifferently. But  a few incidents of a m iraculous nature dispelled all doubts as to Sai Baba 's spiritual greatness. On one occasion the villagers who used to supply oil for the Masjid lamps refused to provide the daily quota. Sai Baba that night filled the lamps with water and kept th em burning the whole night, thus sup≠porting the Sufi belief that "even if the winds from the worlds assail, the light of saints will never f ail". This incident afforded the villagers a glim pse as to what Sai Baba rea lly was, and there≠after they were all eyes and ears to all his behests. Once som e people saw Sai Baba lying in a field outside the village with all the lim bs of the bodyóhead, trunk, arms and legsóall detached and separate. When he returned to norm al consciousness, his apparently severed limbs got automatically assembled once again, and he became his original self. This is a rare phenom enon of spiritual ecstacy to be witnessed in s aintly per≠sonages, and connotes, according to Sufis, a certa in stage of spirituality (Ghousiyat) wherein the divine aspect of love is so very intense and over- powering as to affect visibly even the physical form as stated above. Saints having this state of spiritual ecstasy do not long remain in it; they even tually outgrow this experience. 



    Almost all Perfect M asters more or less adopt shock tactics whenever they condescend to bestow their divine grace materially or spiritually on their devotees. By imparting such shocks, physical or mental, to the recipients of their grace, the Masters very subtly and cleverly try to weaken their ego for them. The spiritual ben efit accruing to an aspirant of the Path, approaching a spiritual Master, is in direct proportion to the weakening or elimination of the ego. Many instances are on record which go to illus trate how spiritual Masters have imparted spirituality to aspirants by asking them to do j ust those things which th eir very nature would revolt against. Shams-e-Tabriz asked Moulana Rum i, the well-known Muslim divine, to fetch wine for him , and Junaid of Baghdad induced con≠firmed drunkards to offer namaz (prayers) in the hope of developing powers which would import wine for them by merely wishing f or it; als o Nizamuddin of Delhi gave a spiritual push to a Hindu yogi stranded on the Path by asking him to em brace Islam which was re-pugnant to him ; and Ghousali Shah Qalander enjoined a Muslim devotee to give up all namaz before conferring upon hi m the vision of Prophet Moham ed. This peculiar attitude of imparting spirituality in certain saints is evidently anticipated by the Persian poet Hafiz when he says: 

"Hesitate not to soak with wine 

The carpet of your prayers: 

The Master orders not in vain, 

He knows the Path and all 

its snares." 

This tendency to s hock tactics is remarkably prominent in Sai Baba. He would always have by his side heaps of stones which he would very of ten throw deliberately at people approach≠ing him for his darshana. Lucky indeed were those who refused to be scared by such a concrete m anifestation of his annoyance and displeasure. He w ould unblushingly demand money of newcomers, and would uncannily name the exact am ount possessed by the party, and which, when parted w ith, would create a serious problem for the return journey. Not that Sai Baba had any attraction for lucre, but this was one of his ways by which he contacted to himself the evil sanskaras of people coming to him . He would very often confound the parents by asking them all innocently if the baby was a boy or a girl even when the sex organs were visible to him . The typical Hindu ceremonies like arti and puja Sai Baba would have them performed in the mosque, and the recitation of Quran by Muslims he would listen to in the Hindu temple. 



   Those familiar with matters spiritual will read a world of meaning in some of the utterances of Sai Baba given below, and they would thereby be able to gauge the standard of his gnosis and the height of his sp iritual perfection. Sai Baba on different occasions has been heard to say: 

    "Those who see Baba in Shirdi have not seen him at all." 

   "I am formless and every-where. " 

"I am not this three cubits and a half height of the body that is called `Sai'".

   "I am God and the Brahanand (uni≠verse)." 

    "I am all and in allósaints, crimi≠nals, animals, etc. I pervade the u ni≠verse. I created Brahma or Khuda (God)." 

"Nothing moves but by my grace."

 "My race is that of Parvardigar (God), my religion is Kabiri (after the saint Kabir) and m y profession is to bestow blessings."

    Sai Baba, as stated in the beginning, was one of the five Perfect Ones of the time, and p ossessed all the characteri≠stics of a Qalander. His spirituality was that of Salik-Majzoob which is a state of realization wherein the aspect of divinity predominates over th e aspect of gnosis. Like all P erfect Masters (Sadgurus) he had a circle of twelve disciples, and his successor, th e spiri≠tual chargeman, is Shri Sadguru Upa≠sani Maharaj of Sakori in Ahm ednagar District. Hazrat Meher Baba once stated that as a m atter of fact he was directly connected with Sai Baba spiritually and indirectly with Upasani Maharaj. 



'  

The fact of his (Meher Baba s) being  midway between the two places; and on '  

brought to norm al consciousness by'  such occasions Sai Bab a s face alw ays  

Upasani Maharaj was due to Sai Baba s  shone with a peculiar lustre and radi≠ 

earthly mission approaching its end,  ance which was noticeable to all. In this  

and hence Upasani Maharaj performed  condition he used to m ake signs in the  

the duty towards him on behalf of Sai  air with his fingers, and this unique and  

Baba.  strange feature of his behaviour con≠ 

    Another duty of a most outstanding  tinued regularly throughout the period  

character that Sai Baba perform ed at  that the European W ar lasted. In this  

the fag end of his earthly m ission was  respect it is also significant that the end '  

the conduct and the term ination of the  of Sai Baba s physical existence on  

Great European W ar of 1914. The  earth synchronises with the term ination  

scientific Western mind would laugh at  of the War in 1918.  

this fantastic claim, but to th e spiri≠     Conclusively, Hazrat Sai Baba was  

tually minded East there is nothing new  the Qutub (Sadguru) of his tim e, and  

about it. Perfect Saints known and un≠ amongst the hierarchy of saints of the  

known do and have perform ed duties  period he was the accredited presiding  

which have oftentim es changed the  authority of their conferences. Such  

map of the world and shaped the  meetings of saints are very often held at  

destinies of m ankind in general and  a moment's notice in different parts of  

nations in particular, although the latter  the world. Another sp ecial feature with  

are ignorant about it. While delving  Sai Baba was his ability to appear sim - 

into the domain of spirituality the West  ultaneously at different places in the  

has yet to learn and unlearn m any  same gross for m. Numerous miracles  

things. Whenever Sai Baba used to  are attributed to him , and it is hoped to  

leave the mosque for going to the  recount a few most unique and interest- 

temple, his arti was usually performed  ing ones in a future issue of this  

Journal.  

ï  
