
To believe that one is free in winning will is illusion. To think that one is free in I infinite in Being, to create the idea of life as free choice in real order in mind infinite is absolutely an ordinary error of life in ignorance. One is in no way free. One is in any way in all ways bound to reaction infinite. In finite I one is bound to life in realizing order in reaction. 
One is free of life in use of life. One is free of Use in I in finite react- ion when surrendered to Him for use of Him. To live in Him in use in I, as Use of Him in us divine is to realize that one is in Him the reaction infinite and in the reaction infinite one is free, in winning order in I as Use infinite. Being in us free to live free, to die free, to be born in our own I infinite is to have in our own mind the divine I in Use. The illusion infinite is the same illusion finite as act, as fact of realised order in I. It is of no use to find a way to react in us—beyond. One is in self-action in delusion a mere 
fool of life that in use in finite reaction thinks of himself to be use of himself as Use selfish! We owe to be so, to make it so, and to appear so, to self-Use... 
But we in us owe in deep un­fathomable life unrealized the Real Life, the good life, the pure life that is unconditional use of Truth as Him. 
That Oneness act of Being, Shri Meher Baba has to stir in Us. He in us is Order and divine use free in One-All-One expansion infinite, This Oneness work in us we realize in real design unselfish when we in Him see the divine life react in us unselfish. To understand Shri Meher Baba one has to realize that He is infinite and finite in One. The divine theme must be in us a fact that we experience, It is individual adjusting in all who in Him resign. One has to subconsciously adjust, and in subtle I order, and in I infinite give-in for Use of Him. It means to live life as Use infinite in­stead of as Use finite personal, 
*Continued from September 1939 issue. 

individual. It means to have a more unselfish outlook, it means to react more universally. It is to give-in in all and to react in all. As use in all, in any, it is to serve unselfishly. 
Unselfish life is practical. The conditions of life shall appear the same, but shall be in substance— One. Life winning in substantial order within shall do in undoing the same One-work in expansion in consciousness—and life external shall appear different. Life real shall appear new in us, and life ordinary shall appear new, as new is all that is new in us in experience. 
All is experience. The divine I is the experience of life infinite in us in love infinite. One is in self-Use in illusion any or all—one is I. One is truth. One is God. So one is One-All-One use infinite—for use infinite. 
The divine life that in us is still illusion. He in us shall stabilize into a state real as experience. It is to be so, as it is so as He who is the personified order in Being as Life Real, as perfect human creature.  The One as Portion infinite, in us is state infinite in illusion—and in Him is realized order in I as Love, One—the all indivisible ex- 
pansion of life real good unselfish—Real One. It is this deep state infinite, in us portion infinie, that He has to realize, to make in us new the old theme. The old theme is to grow-in in us Truth, One, He the Beloved. He is the realizing order infinite that in us is superior to any order in conscience. 
One has to want to pursue one's One-in-All-I as expansion infinite in conscious life and realize in one’s One the new life, as new human. The new life is no more adventure, it is fulfilment real of what seems futile and unreal. It is making new what in us is auto-act of non-realized order, in self-state unreal. 
We earn to see in us life real. We earn to see in us mind as Use of Truth. We realize Oneness as finite use of use infinite. We resign free to win-in free unself-reactive for use selfish—all reactions. 
He is—as He is. He is what He does. He in me is life real that in perpetual reaction is fulfilling my One-in-I life that is infinite. I see, know, feel, in Him resigned the work of Truth grow in reaction in all. To give, to live, to know, to feel is more of use than to think 

Life must be lived in One-All finite show infinite in harmony infinite. It is Oneness Life that we realize in our own small I. 
The real realized state is wonder state in us that He in us shall win as life real. 
Oneness is Rest in Being. To live-in in Him for Him is to live in Him for Him in “One”. This I know, see and find in my Oneness Way in Him. It is more or less infinite joy. It is more or less divine life infinite. It is Oneness State real in love for Him. It is self-delusion work of Oneness in perpetual realizing reaction till in Him one is submerged—no One but All One in Him. 
We need to evolve. We have to surpass the phase in reaction selfish. It is indivisible life, indivisible good real Being expansion in knowing and in Self-use Infinite, it is Being order. This being order is good. It is selfless good Being-order that in use infinite is giving to I—new real life. That what we know, winning in use unselfish is, to bring to real expansion in Use in I in head—the Real Oneness State in Love. To love is to bring to full expansion in us—Truth. It is to make in us Use of the Divine I. As Infinite I it is to live in us—free, to be free, of fear of prejudice, of pain, Indivisible in Use we have to resign to the Self-state in reaction in head as imagination and as self-use of Intuition. We must give Way to us as Human Aspirant of Real Life and no more of the imaginary False I—the Ego. To resign to One who is real is to resign in Use infinite in Us for Use of Him the Beloved true real One. 
Shri Meher Baba speaks: “Give Me the plan of life real. Give Me the game of life unreal. Give Me the work of life infinite. Give Me the passing design of you-as-woman in human strife. See no use in Self for I, or in mind or in intellect—but in Me as Use of Me. The way to know is one. The way to live is two. The way to react is two. The way to see in Me the Use infinite is all one only Use and that is Love. 
When I shall use the Verb to resurrect mind in men and the divine I in mind in use of Me—it is for Use of My One in I Life Infinite, and that is now in preparation. I am here to give-in in you my new born form—new Real Oneness 

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
expansion in Love.  This is the most we as His Oneness  
To say it, is to do it.”  I in Him resigned owe to see to know  
This He in use in us is doing and  to feel, till He in Use Indivisible One  
undoing in every phase, in every hour  helps us out of the New Life in Self  
of life, by experience, by full life in  state in delusion real.  
ordinary way of life, in being in it Use  Shri Meher Baba speaks: “No one is  
impersonal.  real till in Me resigned. No one is good  
We learn to give for Use indivisible,  till in Me in Self in Use infinite real in  
real.  Being, in devotion infinite real in I in  
What we do win in giving in us for  Selfless Service.”  
Use of Him is to form new in Use of I  So it is a game of I to realize in Use  
Infinite our One as I as Portion Infin­ of us—Him.  
ite. He in Use in us is doing the speedy  He in Use in us is the new winning  
order to evolve. So we live here in Use  order to capitulate once more to Truth.  
infinite in I indivisible—new the  Shri Meher Baba here says: “Give- 
Reaction show of life as strife in Use  in—I help you in giving in. Do more—  
in Him. We do in us realize Use. It is  I do in you the most. Give-in—I in you  
life and real Being State in one-all-way  Triumph.”  
—to react unself-reactive—unselfish.  
.  
. 
