 
LIFE and love are inseparable from each other. Where there is life, there is love. Even the most rudimentary type of consciousness is always trying to burst out of its limitations and experience some kind of unity with other forms. Though each form is separate from 
other forms, in reality, they are all forms of the same unity of life; and the latent sense for this hidden inner reality indirectly makes itself felt even in the world of illusion through the attraction which one form has for another form. 
The law of gravitation, to which all the planets and the stars are subject, is in its own way a dim reflection of the Love which prevades every part of the universe. 
Even the forces of repulsion are in 
truth expressions of love, since 
things are repelled from each other 
because they are more powerfully attracted to some other things. Repulsion is a negative consequence of positive attraction. The forces of cohesion and affinity, which prevail in the very constitution of matter are positive expressions of love. A striking example of love at this level is found in the attraction which the magnet exercises 


MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
over iron. All these forms of love are of the lowest type since they are necessarily conditioned by the rudimentary consciousness in which they appear. 
In the animal world this love becomes more explicit in the form of conscious impulses which are directed towards the different objects in the surroundings. This love is instinctive 
Love in the Ani-and it takes the form of gratifying mal Kingdom different desires through the 
appropriation of suitable objects. When the tiger seeks to devour the deer he is in a very real sense in love with the deer. Sex-attraction is another form of love at this level. All the expressions of love at this stage have one thing in common, viz., they all seek to satisfy some bodily impulse or desire through the object of love. 
Human love is much higher than all these lower forms of love, because human beings have fully developed form of consciousness. Though human love 
is continuous with the lower sub-

Human Love has human forms of love, it is, in a way, to adjust itself to different from them because hence-the new factor of forth its operations have to be Reason carried on side by side with a new 
factor which is reason. Sometimes human love manifests itself as a force which is divorced from reason and runs parallel to it; sometimes it manifests itself as a force which gets mixed up with reason and comes into conflict with it; and lastly it expresses itself as a constituent of the harmonised whole where love and reason have been balanced and fused into an integral unity. 
Thus, in relation to reason, human love can enter into three types of combination. In the first type, the sphere of thought and the sphere of love are kept as 
separate as possible, i.e., the

Three Combina­
sphere of love is practically 
tions of Love and 
inaccessible to the operation of

Reason 
reason; and love is allowed little or 
no access to the objects of thought. Complete separation between these two aspects of the spirit is of course never possible; but when 
there is an alternate functioning of love and reason (with both oscillating in their predominance) we have a love which is unillumined by reason, or a reason which is unenlivened by love. In the second type, love and reason are both simultaneously operative but they do not work in harmony with each other. But though this conflict creates confusion it is a necessary phase in the evolution of the higher state where there is a real synthesis of love and reason. In the third type of love this synthesis between love and reason is an accomplished fact with the result that both love as well as reason are so completely transformed that they precipitate the emergence of a new level of consciousness which (in comparison with the normal human consciousness) is best described as super-consciousness. 
Human love makes its appearance in the matrix of ego-consciousncss which has its countless desires. Love is coloured by these factors in many ways. Just as we get an ever-changing variety of 
The Qualitative designs in the kaleidoscope by the Variety in Love various combinations of simpler 
elements, we get an almost limitless qualitative variety in the range of love owing to novel combinations of psychic factors. And just as there are infinite shades in the colours of different flowers, there are in human love diverse delicate differences. 
Human love finds itself encircled by a number of obstructive factors like infatuation, lust, greed, anger and jealousy. In one sense, even these obstructive 
factors are either forms of lower 

The Lower Forms 
love or the inevitable side-results

of Love 
of these lower forms of love. Infatuation, lust and greed might be looked upon as perverted and lower forms of love. In infatuation a person gets enamoured of a sensual object; in lust he develops a craving for sensations in relation to it; and in greed he desires to possess it. Of these three forms of lower love, greed has the tendency to be extended from the original object to the means of obtaining that object. Thus persons become greedy for 
money or power or fame which can become instruments for possessing the different objects of craving. Anger and jealousy come into existence when these lower forms of love are thwarted or threatened to be thwarted. 
These lower forms of love are obstructive to the release of pure love. The stream of love can never become clear and settled until it is disentangled from these limiting and perverting forms of lower love. The lower is the enemy of the higher. If consciousness gets caught in the rhythm of the lower it cannot emancipate itself from its self-created ruts and finds it difficult to get out of them and advance further. Thus the lower form of love continues to interfere with the development of the higher form of love and has to be given up in order to allow the untramelled appearance of the higher form of love. 
The emergence of the higher love from the shell of the lower love is helped by the constant exercise of discrimination. Therefore love has to be carefully distinguished from the obstructive factors of infatuation, lust, greed and anger. In infatuation the person is a passive victim of the spell of conceived attraction of the object; but in love there is an active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love. 
Love is also different from lust. In lust, there is a reliance upon the object of sense and consequent spiritual subordination of the soul in relation to it; but love puts the soul into direct and co-ordinate relation with the Reality which is behind the form. Therefore, lust is experienced as being heavy and love is experienced as being light. In lust, there is a narrowing down of life and in love there is an expansion in being. To have loved one soul is like adding its life to your own, your life is, as it were, multiplied and you virtually live in two centres. If you love the whole world, you vicariously live in the whole world. But in lust there is the ebbing down of life and the general sense of hopeless dependence on a form which is regarded as another. Thus, in lust there is the accentuation of separateness and suffering; but in love—there is the feeling of unity and joy. Lust is dissipation; love is recreation. Lust is a craving of the senses; love is the expression of the spirit. Lust seeks fulfilment but love experiences fulfilment. In lust, there is excitement; but in love there is tranquillity. 

Love is equally different from greed. Greed is possessiveness in all its gross and subtle forms. It seeks to appropriate gross things and persons as well as the abstract and intangible things like fame and power. In love, the annexation of the other person to 
your individual life is out of question and there is a free and creative outpouring that enlivens and replenishes the psychic being of the beloved independently of any expectations for the self. And we have the paradox, that greed which seeks for the self the appropriation of another object does in fact lead to the opposite result of bringing the self under the tutelage of the object; and love which aims at giving away the self to the object does in fact lead to a spiritual incorporation of the beloved in the very being of the lover. In greed the self tries to possess the object, but is itself spiritually possessed by the object; and in love the self offers itself to the beloved without any reservations, but in that very act it finds that it has included the beloved in its own being. 
Infatuation, lust and greed together constitute a spiritual malady which is often rendered more virulent 
by the aggravating symptoms 


of anger and jealousy: and pure 
love, in sharp contra-distinction 
with them is the bloom of 
spiritual perfection. Human love is so much tethered by these limiting conditions that the spontaneous appearance of pure love from within becomes impossible. So, when such pure love arises in the aspirant it is always a gift. Pure love arises in the heart of the aspirant in response to the descent of the Grace from the Master. When pure love is first received as a gift of the Master it 
comes to be lodged in the consciousness of the aspirant like the seed in a favourable soil and in the course of time the seed develops into a plant and then into the full-grown tree. 
The descent of the Grace of the Master is however conditioned by the preliminary spiritual preparation of the aspirant. This preliminary spiritual 
preparation for Grace is never 

Spiritual Prepara-complete until the aspirant has 
tion for Grace built into his psychic make-up 
some divine attributes. When a person avoids backbiting and thinks more of the good points in others than of their bad points and when he can practise supreme tolerance and desires the good of others even at the cost of his own self, the aspirant is ready to receive the Grace of the Master. One of the greatest obstacles which hinders this spiritual preparation of the aspirant is worry; and when with supreme effort this obstacle of worry is overcome, a way is paved for the cultivation of the divine attributes which constitute the spiritual preparation of the disciple. As soon as the disciple is ready, the Grace of the Master descends; for the Master who is the ocean of Divine Love is always on the look out for the soul in whom his Grace will fructify. 
The kind of love which is awakened by the Grace of the Master is a rare privilege. The mother who is willing to sacrifice all and to die for her child 
and the martyr who is prepared 

Pure Love is Very 
to give up his very life for his 

Rare 
country are indeed supremely noble; but they have not necessarily tasted of this pure love which comes to be born through the Grace of the Master. Even the great Yogis with long beards who, sitting in caves and mountains, are completely absorbed in deep samadhi, do not necessarily have this precious love. 
Pure love which is awakened through the Grace of the Master is more valuable than any other method which may be adopted by the aspirant. Such love not only combines in itself the merits of all the disciplines but excels them all in its efficacy to lead the aspirant to his Goal. When this love is 
born the aspirant has only one desire; and that one 
desire is to be united with the Divine Beloved. Such 
withdrawal of consciousness from 
all other desires leads to infinite 
purity; therefore nothing purifies 
the aspirant more completely than this love. The aspirant is ever willing to offer everything for the Divine Beloved; and no sacrifice is too difficult for him. All his thoughts are turned away from the self and come to be exclusively centred on the Divine Beloved. And through the intensity of this ever-growing love he eventually breaks through the shackles of the self and becomes united with the Beloved. This is the comsummation of love. When love has thus found its fruition it has become Divine. 
Divine Love is qualitatively different from human love. Human love is for the many in the One and Divine Love is for the One in the many. Human love leads to 
innumerable complications and 
tangles; but Divine Love leads 
to integration and freedom. In 
Divine Love, the personal and the 
impersonal aspects are equally balanced; but in human love the two aspects are in alternating ascendancy. When, in human love, the personal note is predominant, it leads to a man's being utterly blind to the intrinsic worth of other forms; and when, as in the sense of duty, love is predominantly impersonal, it often makes him cold, rigid and mechanical. The sense of duty comes to the man as external constraint of behaviour; but in Divine Love there is unrestrained freedom and unbounded spontaneity. Human love in its personal and impersonal aspects is limited; but Divine Love with its fusion of the personal and the impersonal aspects is infinite in being and expression. 
Even the highest type of human love is subject to the limitation of individual nature which persists till the seventh plane; but Divine Love arises after the disappearance of the individual mind and is free from the trammels of individual nature. In human love the duality of the lover and the Beloved persists; but in Divine Love the lover and 



the Beloved become one. At this stage, the aspirant 
has stepped out of the domain 
of duality and become one 
with God; for Divine Love is 
God. When the lover and the 
Beloved are one, that is the end and the beginning. 
It is for the sake of Love that the whole universe sprang into existence and it is for the sake of Love that it is kept going. God descends into the realm of illusion 


because the apparent duality of 
the Beloved and the Lover is 
eventually contributory to His 
conscious enjoyment of His own 
divinity. The development of love is conditioned and sustained by the tension of duality. God has to suffer the apparent differentiation into the multi­plicity of souls in order to carry on the game of Love. They are His own forms and in relation to them He at once assumes the role of the Divine Lover and the Divine Beloved. As the Beloved, He is the real and the ultimate object of their appreciation; and as the Divine Lover, He is their real and Ultimate Saviour drawing them back to Himself. Thus though the whole world of duality is only an illusion, that illusion has come into being for a significant purpose. 
Love is the reflection of God's Unity in the world of duality. It constitutes the entire significance of creation. If love is excluded from life all the souls in the world 

assume complete externality to 
each other and the only possible 
relations and contacts in such a 
loveless world are superficial and mechanical. It is because of love that the contacts and relations between individual souls become significant; and it is love which gives meaning and value to all the happenings in the world of duality. But, while love gives meaning to the world of duality, it is at the same time, a standing challenge to duality. As love gathers strength, it generates creative restlessness and becomes the main driving power of that spiritual dynamic which ultimately succeeds in restoring to consciousness the original Unity of Being. 


