For an ordinary positive optimist, life is full of enjoyment and enchant­ing novelty of experience; yet even for them disappointments and sorrows are unavoidable, as surely as the shadow follows the light. Most colourful life fately comes to its decrease, fading away in intensity, creativeness and joy; at the end of its course it leaves one with the great problem of life unsolved, to face the unknown—helpless and blind before the hidden yet unconquerable law of life. People mostly leave this life exhausted in struggle or in fear before the mystery of the Beyond; the more fortunate ones, at best, resign to the will of God, if they believed in His existence. To go through life according to that, means to live through the passing beauty of emotional joys and deceiving pleasures. It is like a sorcery that bewitches and lures one to live, to go through it; its haunting vision drives one on and on to further pursuit; yet it never 
satisfies the inborn thirst for that greater "something" which men feel must exist and is real, yet mysteriously remains undefined and undiscovered in this whirl of the world. This "blue bird" of happiness, this presentment of true joy, moves one to follow this inner call at all costs without return. Once conclu­sions are set clear and deeply felt, one asks the Truth and nothing but the Truth; one wants to share in inward understanding and certainty with those who have attained, who 
know. 
With all gathered momentum of maturity or suffering one throws its all intensity, its supreme claim into this burning quest in this legitimate anguish of real knowledge. One wants to have one's own experience in the Greater Life, which the Great Souls have and are enjoying and which they have proclaimed accessible to all seekers. Those who have lived through this stage of life know the longing for real certitude and pure beauty of existence. They arrive to a new start of life with its ever increasing romance with its expanding richness in fulfilment of one's destiny. "Give me the Centre of stronghold, and I will turn the Universe," said Archimedes. When we as individuals discover that this Centre is within, then new world opens before us. When one has ap­proached and touched the central Pulse of Being, the very point of existence, this cardinal solution leads to the all subsequent ones to the reordering of all our life, when it is also called ''injustices", and puzzles become cleared. In the light of this vision of a definite Goal “within” oneself, all our energies and attitudes begin to readjust like molecules drawn to the magnet, irresistibly following their inherent will of volition towards Supreme Happiness and Truth. This turning point in life is the spiritual awak­ening which like the sun spreads light far and high, stirring new life forces, penetrating deep, speeding growth, unfolding beauty which clouds concealed before. It is indeed like the  sun piercing the darkness. 

This awakening is a new spiritual inner experience; it makes one inward aware of the spiritual meaning of life, with all its new beauty; it opens new sources in feeling and experience; it floods one with increased energies; the revived fresh joy makes one dynamic in inner Being moved to fuller expression and finer expansions. It is indeed like the light of the sun, or like the gush of streaming waters from the rock, which has been pierced in search of the spring. 
This is what happens when one comes in contact with the Perfect Master, a God-Man, who has realized the fullness of Truth. The Truth of this experience is a fact experienced since ages by those who made the supreme use of their existence. This fact is known through history in the manifestations of Avatars and other God-realized Masters and Saints as well as their disciples. Those Beings have always shined their Light to humanity, yet so little followed and understood. And it is also known that those who have mostly longed for Truth and who whole-heartedly followed the 

inner call to the very end, have received the full Grace from their Masters. These are the fortunate ones who, restless for true Know­ledge, seek it regardless of all difficulties, who open “within” to the pure intuition of Truth, who shun the death of crystalization and the traps of illusions, who choose even to die for themselves in love of real Truth than to die blind in fear and ignorance. For those who leave aside their doubts and conceit of the limited mind, life starts anew. 
In the Light of the Master all their little idols of the ego one after another vanish, burned away by the pure flame and Love of the Master; the curtain of old shadows is gradually torn asunder to reveal the Truth behind the illusion of many­ness; they will know the joy that no man can take away, for they will know Love which excludes none. The contact with the Master usually brings about the experience of finer, purer state not known before. It is characterized by the feeling of purification and lightness, of happy serenity and detachment as an out­come of mental release. 
Blissful contentment of having found within the alive joy creates a feeling of being born anew. It is a real baptism, the nearness to the pure radiations of the Master. A sense of inner harmony and bliss gives new wings of inspiration; now sure, one feels a never experienced state of freedom from former burdens of the mind—first glimpse of pure happiness. Though not every one meets the Master in the same state of mind and need and not every one gets at first the same immediate reaction, yet at a certain time the contact with the Master always creates the new joy and the inner certitude of the Truth of the Source which brought about this Awak­ening. The religious psychology has described the uniformity of the essential characteristics of spiritual evolution in the seeker; ancient and modern philosophers have many times pointed this fact. 
Where science argues, contradicts or denies leaving one as ever nowhere and uncertain, the spiritual Truth and the religious search open a sure way within men's conscious­ness; the awakened creative expan­sion opens purer grasps and direct intuitive contact of understanding, or greater "knowing". The inner condi­tions of knowing, the very tool of knowing which is knowing cons­ciousness itself, becomes enriched by new creativeness and keener direct penetration, opening a new experi­ence and knowing. Those who have received the experience of that kind are many among the well-known men in history. It is of sure and convincing nature, being a direct evidence of the inner transformation experienced within, with all its benefic reactions in Being and its outcomes inner as well as outer. Essentially subjective, this experi­ence is at the same time an objective fact when observed outwardly, with all its symptoms and stages of advancement. Science differs from the search of spiritual Truth. In the last, one becomes the object of knowing and becoming, or rather of knowing through becoming. It implies the increase of inner spiritual growth and transformation of our cons­ciousness itself with its ever expanding purer grasp. This brings out the new knowing consciousness highly refined in intuitive sensitivity and its pure direct operation. It functions as a natural medium of immediate contact with the subject and objective knowing—till one ultimately blends with the source itself, becomes One as realized all knowing universal Self. 

Kant in his Gnosiology has well established the idea of limitations of human capacity of knowing. This defines and explains the failure in real Knowledge through the medium of the limited mind alone. Yet we know, as mentioned above, the awakening contact with the Master can promote the new creative resources in consciousness. Together with Self perfection spiritually understood one unfolds the perfec­tion of greater capacity of knowing. This stupendous fact needs no emphasis to show its evident supremacy over the undeveloped ordinary mind. One has to approach this fact with an open mind and a free daring of willingness in will, and start aflame for the new search for the ever new old way of Truth. The sophisticated state of mind of this 

overmentalized ago puts an obstacle to this freedom of breaking the old false gods, to the transcending of the bindings of dogmas and prejudices of mind. The few real geniuses, whose intuition is open enough to the sense of the vastness of the unknown inaccessible to usual meth­ods of investigation, sincerely realize their helplessness. To them the problem remains only more open than ever, the longing only greater. The recognition of the insufficiency of the means of Knowledge makes them only more humble yet greater, as it brings them nearer to Truth. Having gone to the last limit of investigation, they come nearest to the very last barrier of hope in seeking the unsolvable by mind medium alone. 
From the point of view of ethical reliability and of real sense of honesty, no lover of science and knowledge can be equal to a real lover of Truth. The last will lay his very life, all his personal bindings and attachments in its pursuit; he will sacrifice the very ego itself whose limitations hinder, obscure and deceive the seeker. 
Though many scientists have exposed themselves to suffering and danger to their lives, yet the real Lover of Truth will go still further and will find nothing impossible in order to become himself the fit perfected instrument of that true Knowledge. It is only in accordance with Kant's Gnosiology, if one extends the vision into the potential hidden sources of consciousness. So, in order to know, we must be equipped with proper perfected means of knowledge, we must fulfil the necessary conditions in which the attainment of perfection in knowledge is possible. It is all subject to a law and has its rational basis in profound Pure Logic and Orderer of Being. It is in obeyance to the One Law of Cause and Effect, of the establised latent Plan of evolution that this supreme trans­formation of consciousness is really accessible to men. 
In his sefless search and love for Truth the real seeker eliminates all confinements and established bar­riers; he does not claim the ability to know before being able to improve his own capacity of knowledge. The actual change of condi­tions in consciousness, in our very being alone, one provides this ultimate right. Perfect knowledge is indivisible from perfect conditions of knowing. The perfect knowing is in the perfect being. Being perfect implies and contains the perfect knowing. We touch here upon the synthetic and automatic evidences when the lesser cannot be equal to the greater. 

The history of the past and the present existence of Shri Meher Baba—the Perfect Master, the God­man—provide the full proof of the Truth of that statement. 
If men continue to draw the curtain before the Light remaining attached to their plane of cons­ciousness and lower level of existence, how can they progress, learn and become happy? Honest, sincere open-mindedness leads to advancement in every walk of life; only dynamic willingness can break the inertia of the old standards, move and inspire to further search of perfection. Nothing could appeal more to the imagination of pioneering spirit of seekers, as possibility to see and contact the One who is that fact of Perfection in Being accessible to all. He is for all the progressive humanity as well as to all the destitutes of life who lost hope of revival. Shri Meher Baba has brought to all living beings the blessing of this true life revival. In His Universal Being He embraces all life—having to fulfil the task of Universal Awakening. He is unique in His selflessness and superhuman scope of creative activity. His unceasing seen and unseen work shows its good of permanent change as spiritual transformation of life within and without. "As within, so without is the Law," said Baba. His works are perceived directly as a Grace of new inner experience. Those who come in contact with Him and who open and surrender their hearts to Him make the real good use of new opportunity. 
For the psychologists of this age this perfect example of Godhood in a man reveals the hidden key of the true permanent sublimation as the actual transformation of men. With the increase of mental suffering and of mental abnormalities, psycho­analysis 

became a very popular science of our days. Though in many cases their methods of ego-maximation through sublimations of energies and interests proved to be helpful in a human sense, yet, even so, the cause of trouble remains unremoved; so there is no security of a perm­anent cure or protection from some new form of abnormality or return to the old one. As it deals with the man of gross plane, and as the scientist himself did not transcend the ordinary p1ane of consciousness however great he may be, the patients cannot receive the real cure which can be done through removal of the very root-cause of the defect. Such effective rectification extends into greater competence and creativeness in being. Often the cause of suffering is to be found in the subtle or psychic plane of consciousness, beyond the usual field of scientific investigation and understanding. Psycho-analysis can at best release the locked up ener­gies into new applications of forces on the same plane of existence for some physical, emotional or mental use of the ego;  sublimation which 
does not create true security can naturally be only of a relative pass­ing value, as all personal spiritually unawakened existence can be. Often it only retards one from the Goal and real happiness, as it may only strengthen the ego and lead to new stronger attachments, leaving one to face over the same problem of life unsolved. The momentum of suffer­ing in such case would not be fully utilized, but only shifted and postponed. It would miss its spiritual chance of serving the real growth in consciousness and enlightenment. A radica1 change requires a radical transformation. 
The true help is not the ego­rnaximation but the ego-elimination; then it becomes the real spiritual maximation based on permanent elimination of the cause of suffering and abnormality that can be ac­complished only in the Light of spiritual evolution of the Soul; it can be only in the competence of the One, who himself has gone through its whole, till the very climax—the Real Maximum of the Highest Universal Self. Then the ego­maximation in a real 

sense would mean the Awakening of the Higher Self. That would bring the growing out of the limitations of old inclinations of the ego; it would mean purification of consciousness from old impressions in favour of new detached, selfless attitudes, which is possible only in a pure spiritually awakened state of consciousness. This spiritual transformation along the line of spiritual destiny of men creates the miracle of washing out of the past impressions accumulated through lives, and of creating of the new ones in harmony with the Law of spiritual perfection. This operation of the ego itself men cannot perform alone. The subject and the object being identified and at the same time imperfect, this venturing into the Great Unknown is utterly insecure and simply impossible; it actually never took place without the contact of the Perfect God-realized Master. Such operation requires the True Knowledge of Being in its fullness and the capacity of conscious functioning within life's substance. Such authority and art no ordinary, even greatest men can have; it belongs 
to One of Perfect Being, of Perfect Knowledge and of Perfect Power given selflessly for the good of humanity. 
Those who have tried the short cuts, as they thought, to Truth, and practised the Eastern methods of some yogic exercises of breathing, like hatha yoga, pranayam, etc., know the resurrecting experience of this contact with the Sadguru who shows the Real Way of Truth, Knowledge, of Oneness and God. The awakened heart gradually balances the head and secures the harmony and progress on the Path. Through elimination of egoism the Master prepares His followers to be the pure recepients of Love Divine, and makes them selfless workers in life. The God-man, seeing within life, as it is, creates and changes at will according to the need in view of a definite Ultimate fulfilment. He performs and accomplishes what men can even hardly imagine as possible. The scientists of this era will come to love Truth above all, leaving aside old obstacles, trying the new creative possibilities irrefutable in the Light of that Source, which 

PERFECT  KNOWING IN  PERFECT  BEING 
became available to all who truly seek! Those who want to open the eyes will he creatively stirred, anew inspired by the One who has attained! 
This state of perfection can be attained on the price of willing surrenderance and transcention of old conditions within. New men and New Knowledge will be born from the sacred longing of Truth, of Light. They will within themselves realize the creative miracle of transforma­tion. Spontaneous natural exper­ience within will be the response to the Grace of His Love. It is exper­ienced when it is received, though it may be in the beginning an uncons­cious response, coming into fruition gradually or in the blaze of a lightening! Then Love and Joy has no end. 
When the Way to Truth is found, all else is found. It is utmost, when surrenderance is unconditional, of pure heart, for the sake of Truth, of 

. 
love. The supreme joy which one experiences is a natural outcome of raised life's momentum which is latent in all creation, and is destined to be expressed in its completeness. 
Even the first stages of awakening one will not exchange for any worldly enjoyments and attachments. Once really tasted, this spiritual atmosphore, the joy in contact of the Divine Love will be ever cherished as the only treasure worth finding and attaining even as a glimpse! It is like a seed; its growth is secured within it; but it comes to full growth and bloom in the Light and proper care of the Loving Gardener! 
Love is essential for supreme knowing, as it is only Love that will bring out the essential harmony, equilibrium and fullness of Unity in Being! In that sense one can say: "To love is to Know." This Love is a Grace!! Follow Him who, Perfect in Knowing, is Perfect in Being! 
