
"The brilliance of the Sun shall be tarnished by Mercury's alloy of gold and silver, and there shall be dread among those who investigate." (The bright light of spiritual truth is tar­nished as gold is dimmed by alloy with silver, inspiring fear amongst seekers. In one aspect silver typifies the "astral" which is an obstacle to spirituality.) 
"Stilbon of Arcadia shall change the disc of the Sun." (Stilbo is the name given by the Ancients to Mercury, who to the Greeks, is Hermes, the messenger of the gods. The latter is therefore the enlightened understanding, through which man may receive the revelation of his own true spiritual nature. The Physical Sun is the source of life on the physical plane, and thus to understand the spiritual source of the Sun’s power, will change "its disc" in the eyes of men, and so alter their understanding of physical life also.) 
''The helmet of Mars shall call for Venus." (War most terrible will compel Love in the last extremity.) 
"The helmet of Mars shall cast a Shadow." (War is the shadow of Mars. Esoterically also, Mars represents the death of the physical desires in man, and his regeneration thereby.) 
''Iron Orion shall unsheathe his sword." (This also is an "inner" fight, as the life of Orion is a type of man's journey from the animal stages of consciousness to the control and sublimation of sense desires. It has its correspondence in the outer world also, where men "of iron" strive and fight together, in this age of Kaliyuga.) 
"The Phœbus of the sea shall trouble the clouds." (Sea and Water are symbolically "matter" and "mind" respectively, and the clouds, or sanskaras which dim man's consciousness, will be dispelled by Phœbus Apollo.) 
''The madness of Mercury shall pass all bounds.'' (Human faculties which the gods personify, have both their higher and lower aspects. Mercury, mad, would indicate its lowest aspect, i.e., the intellectual run riot.) 
"Jupiter shall forsake his lawful paths, and Venus shall 

MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
desert the lines appointed for her." 
(The chaos in the outer world will also extend to the unseen worlds wherein the gods function.) 
''The twelve houses of the stars shall deplore the transition of their guests." (The signs of the Zodiac represent human faculties which at this time, change their relative positions and result in great confusion.) 
"The scales of Libra shall hang obliquely until Aries shall put his curved horns under them." ("Libra is the sign of the balance, while Aries, the Ram, is the principle of gene­ration. The spiritual equilibrium of the world will be upset."* "Aries represents the energy and mani­fested life of the deity."† Thus this discord is adjusted by the work of the God-realized Saviour.) 
Under various other similar illustrations, Scorpio, Cancer, Virgo, Sagittarius, the Moon, indicate the opposition to virtue and order, and the break-up of the old dispensation, in the relations they bear to each other at the time of the appearance of the World Saviour. The "Pleiades break forth into weeping", but their prayer to the gods for protection will not pass unheard, as in the ancient legend. 
Thereafter, as Merlin prophesies under the symbol of "Janus" whose offices shall never return, ''there will be no more war, with the advent of the Golden Age, when the manifestation of the Saviour fills the world with spirituality, purifying the very springs of human life, thought and feeling, creating the ancient wisdom in its pristine purity and vitalizing with the Holy Spirit in the Universal Day of Pentecost the uttermost parts of the Universe. Symbolically, Merlin foreshadows this culmin­ation in the phrases:— 
"The waters shall rise at the stroke of a wand, and the labours of the ancients shall be recreated. The winds shall strive together with an awful blast and shall make their sound among the stars." 

