Despite the treatment of the Master by the Jews, there was a widespread longing for their Messiah in the minds and hearts of all, and this atmosphere of expec­tancy pervades the whole world today. Of India, it was written over 20 years ago: 
"All the thousands of peasants' huts that I visited were not huts but shrines of God. 
Every home had its worship and even-song. 
Each man believed, beyond argument, that His soul was immortal. 
And one and all held that the New Avatar of the Kingdom of Right­eousness was impending.'' 
Baba has explained that the Master gathers around Him a circle of close disciples through whom He works for others as well as for their own spiritual advancement, and that their training by Himself is very 
important. During the early stages, Jesus encouraged them by the miracle of the miraculous draft of fishes. The disciples had toiled all night without success, and Jesus came to them and commanded them to let their nets down on the other side of their boat, and they were so laden that another boat was needed to deal with the haul. The inner work of the Master, proceeding simultaneously, affected Peter, and he became very conscious of his own shortcomings and unworthiness to be in His Presence. There is an aspect of humour in the situation, as one would expect Peter to have withdrawn, but he besought the Master to leave Him, so confused was he; but that also was eloquent of his distress. 
When Baba was passing through London on an early visit, being swiftly driven in a car, He suddenly gazed up at 
* Continued from September 1939 issue. 

a tall building, leaning forward to do so, and His companions asked what he was looking at so intently. He merely continued looking, when one of them remembered, and said, "We used to live up there," an event so unimportant to them as to be hardly worth mentioning, for they did not know Him then. "That is why I was looking," He replied, thus showing that He was familiar with even minor happenings in their lives, and so awakening in them the realization of His inner connection with them, at the very outset of their meeting Him. Limitations of time and space do not affect the Master; once, when in Persia, Baba appeared in Bombay and saved the life of a dying child; on His recent journey to Jubbulpore, He was recognized by a well-known holy man who had seen Him when on pilgrimage to Hardwar crossing a bridge, although Baba was thous­ands of miles away physically. He explained to His disciples, who were present, that though He was with them then, He was also in many other places at the same time. 
Vivekanand has explained how the Master works through hap- 
penings, and this may be seen in the sequence of events in the gospel story, and also by those who are closely associated with Baba. After spending an hour with Him at the house of some Indian followers in London, we took a short journey with Him on the Underground Railway costing a penny fare, but that everyday occurrence became a means of receiving a powerful demonstration of a vital principle in discipleship, all the more vivid and lasting because connected with an actual event. This intimate and infinite wisdom of the Master pervades all His words and actions, and in St. John's gospel, Chapter 13-17, is disclosed the inner relationship between the close circle of disciples and Himself. In those tense days, at the end of His life with them, their final test for which He had been preparing them, when all seemed lost, they could re­member how close they were to him even in those far distant early days when they first heard His voice and left all to follow Him. The excited crowds, drawn by His miracles 

and Love, which they remembered as if yesterday, and then the time apart in the Mount with Him when they heard of the inner kingdom within the heart, wherein justice reigns and love arises to comfort the mourner and satisfy those who hunger and thirst after right­eousness, ruled by the poor in spirit, and bringing happiness out of suffering borne of Him. All their strivings for pre-eminence in His Kingdom had gone and they remembered the little child through whom He showed them the essential quality of humility in discipleship. How difficult had been that lesson amidst the crowds that flocked to Him again and again, and the miracle of the healing of the absent servant of the Centurion, the leper, and Peter's wife's mother, coming together, had made them feel that the day of outer triumph was surely come. 
During one of Baba's visits to Persia, He healed the absent son of a distressed hotel servant, found by one of His followers and brought to Him for help. Baba listened to the man's story of the boy at death's door, and telling him not to worry, handed him a cardamom to give to him, saying, "Give this to your son and make him eat it, and he will be alright." The father dashed home, his joy unbounded, and the boy, on taking the cardamom, "seemed snatched from the jaws of death", the narrator continues, and much to the surprise of his relatives, was quite recovered, and got up from his bed. The crowds that came to Baba after this, and other events at the houses to which He was invited, are reminders of the scenes wit­nessed by the disciples in Palestine, though for Baba's own disciples, the journey was full of difficulties and tests of endurance. 
An unexpected test of faith of Jesus' came to those who were fishermen and had faced the sudden tempests on the Sea of Galilee all their lives. He was asleep in the boat with them, and they awoke Him in terror at the storm, which He rebuked, and brought calm to them and the elements, also rebuking their lack of faith, but with no word for disturbing His rest. 
It may be that the disciples, rendered more sensitive by be- 

ing with Him, were actually feeling the effect of His work on the inner planes, for Baba has explained that the Master’s work does not cease when He lays aside His physical body. The effect of this on their minds and in Nature without, and His subsequent calming of both, would be the means of His manifesting on the outer planes what He was accomplishing on the inner, first, for the benefit of humanity, thus completing the work through their presence with Him in the boat. 
After landing, they witnessed His power over mental storm, in the healing of two maniacs, who terrorised the countryside. These recognised the Master, and testified to His Divine Nature before leaving those whom they obsessed, at His word. Perhaps the people in that district needed some special awakening, but they were to have a shock, when they saw the distant herd of swine dashing to its death, and though they were delivered from the fear of the maniacs, who were now harmless, they besought Jesus to leave them. He had allowed the obsessing influences to enter the swine, with which they must have 
had some affinity, and thus the Master used their karma to emph­asise some aspects of His work that is not disclosed. 
Baba's methods and work for the God-mad are significant for themselves as well as the world which needs to regain its poise and harmony through the powers available for humanity, but so little appreciated in their use. In this great work, His mandali have been tested, seeking out and bringing them to Him under baffling conditions and attending to their needs. In England, too, we have seen His work for others mentally afflicted brought into touch with Him by disciples, though not always to His physical presence. 
The succession of events in .he lives of the disciples of Jesus, including His healing the man with the palsy, and the discomfiture of the scribes who doubted the status of the Master to forgive His sins, was followed by their greatest test upto that time, when He sent them away to strange cities, to tell others His message. Giving them detailed instructions for the journey, He reminded them that they would be as lambs amongst wolves, but He would be ever with them. They had already given up all, for Him, and now they were to be denied His physical presence. Travelling thus, with no thought for the morrow, they realised His presence in all hearts, so that every home they entered became their own, with the Master enshrined, and they thus received more than the hundredfold reward He had promised those who gave up their homes and kindred for His sake, and the gospels! This was the foretaste of realizing the Kingdom of Heaven, uninterruptedly, which, He reminded them on their return, was a more valuable possession spiritually than the power over the devils they had cast out through His Grace. 

Their return to His side and the beloved accustomed daily contact was no sooner accomplished than there came the terrible news of John Baptist's death in prison, to remind them of their Master's impending sufferings and the persecution of His followers. But Jesus went on with His work, undisturbed, for "the Master is not 
* 
concerned with death, as He knows that men do not cease to exist when they die".* With them and the multitude that followed Him, He went into the desert, and all were hungry. Thinking, perhaps of His rest, they wanted Him to have the people sent to the villages to buy their food, but Jesus countered their plan by saying, ''Give ye them to eat," knowing full well they had hardly enough for themselves. It was no small task to arrange the people in hundred companies of fifty, expecting a good meal, when all were so tired and there was nothing there for them. But the Master blessed what they had, and it was sufficient for all needs, physical and spiritual, as they distributed His gifts to the expectant crowds. 
He Himself dispersed them to their homes, tenderly meeting His guests as the little families or lonely men and women departed, for He had sent the disciples away, their work being done. Many may have turned to gaze at His lonely figure against the night sky, filled with the awe and wonder 
