

Our Saint is also called Bhaktisara or essence of God-Love. He was named after the place of his nativity, Tiru-Mazhisai, which is near Punamattee ( Madras ).
   The wife of Bhargava Rishi conceived and gave birth to a lump of flesh, in Maghaasterism, Taishya month (January-February), Siddharthi year of last Dwapara Yuga (cycle). The parents did not know what to do with this unnatural monstrosity. Theytook it and kept it in the shade of a bamboo bush in the forest and went away.
Though abandoned by the parents, this holy lump of flesh was taken care of by the Lord, the friend of the distressed (Apad-bandhava). The fleshylump devel-oped form and began to breathe. It saw the Divine Vision and began to cry. This loud cry reached the ears of Tiruvalan, a woodman, 

who had been felling trees hard by. He saw the Divine Child, took it in his arms, caressed it and gave it to his childless wife, who received it with open arms. The biographer says: "For indeed the anatomy of her breasts underwent change; they moistened and living milk began to drip." But the Divine Child would not feed on human breasts. It grew into a fine boy, the wonder of all who saw him. A venerable old childless man with his wife visited this marvellous boy and offered him pure milk. The boy drank it. The couple visited him every day with milk, and he would take only that milk and no other food. One day he drank the milk leaving a portion of it in the vessel. He asked the couple to drink it, and said that they would have a good son. To them was born a godly child, whom they named Kani-Kkannar. 
* Continued from May 1939 issue. 
Our young Saint was about seven years of age. This precious youth found the then existing many systems of philosophy dry and unsatisfactory. It is said that he went on examining the Vedas and the other sacred lore for seven hundred years, and at last found that the Parabrahmam or Paratatwam was the only Truth or Reality. He found that by Bhakti, and not by pure reason, that the Truth can be realized. It is very interesting to note that he perceived and realized God "in His fullness of Essence, Charac­ter, Beauty, Environment and Display, both in spheres spiritual as well as material." It is said that during his tapas by the side of Gajendra Tank at 'I'iruvallikeni (Triplicane, Madras), even Rudra could not disturb him in his meditation. 
One Konkana-Siddhan, a magician belonging to the Malay­alam Country, wished to test our Saint. He gave the latter a pill which, he said, would convert the 80th part of a copper coin into gold of fabulous value. The Saint rubbed his own body and taking his sweat mixed it with a bit of wax which he 
took from his ear, gave that pill to the alchemist and said that it would give him many crores of rupees. The magician was puzzled. He prostrated before our Saint and went away abashed. 
     Our Saint Azhvar then con­tinued his meditation uninter­rupted in a cave. He met there our Azhvar-T'riad, Poygai, Pudam and Pey, and "their minds united and dissolved in the ambrosial waters of His love." After some time he left his cave and went to his native place Mahisara, and then to Kanchi (Conjeeveram). 
     We have spoken of the holy child Kani-Kkannar. He came to Kanchi and became the disciple of our Saint. An old woman also was doing him service. One day he asked her what boon she wanted. It is said that she prayed that she may be blessed with youth, and that she immediately became a woman of surpassing beauty. The story is this: Pallavaraya, the King of 'I'ondamandalam country, married her and was spending his time happily with her. When the King became old, the wife still retained her youthful beauty. She told him that she got this 

boon from our Saint Bhaktisara, and that he might also get the same from him through Kani-Kkannar. The holy soul Kani-Kkannar visited the palace for alms, and the King requested him to bring our Saint to his palace. The reply was, "My Master does not go to the house of any person, nor does he care for any King." Thereupon the King asked him to sing a verse in his praise. He sang thus: “Oh, ne'er to mortal praise can 
stoop this tongue, Most blest when sole the Lord Supreme it sings. Oh, not for adulation made this mouth, Nor I can bribe my muse for human use." 
The King became very angry and banished him from his kingdom. It is said that with Kani-Kkannar our Saint and even the one God left the palace. There was famine and pesti­lence in the land, and wise men told the King the truth. The King repented, and our Saints returned with their blessings. The kingdom again became prosperous, and the proud King became humble. 
Our Saint went to Kumbha­konam and had divine experi­ences there. He there wrote the two holy works, Nanmukhan-Tiruvandadi and Tiru­cchanda-viruttam, and it is said, he lived for 4700 years. 
(N. B.—The Old Testament says that Adam lived for 930 years, Enos for 905 and Cainan 980). 
Our Saint was called Bhakti­sara. What is Bhakti? For a minute turn to John: "Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God; and everyone that loveth is begotten of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. (John IV 7,8). There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear, because fear hath punishment, and he that feareth is not made perfect in love. We love because He first loved us. If a man says, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, cannot love God whom he hath not seen. And this command­ment have we from him, that he who loveth God loveth his brother also." (18-21). The Gita says that the Lord is in the heart of all beings—heart, the seat of compassion. If we carefully read the lives of the Vaishnava Saints, we find that they were embodiments of compassion— of love—of love to all beings— of love to God. It is the love inseparable from Jnana (Knowledge). It is the tender­ness which deplores the fate of men who are turned away from God. It is the charity in the hearts of Saints which made the high caste—Kurattazhvan— help the low caste woman on the banks of Kaveri, at Srirangam. That is true Bhakti, and our Saint was an embodiment of such Bhakti. 

Blessed be Saint Tiru-mazhi­sai Azhvar alias Bhaktisara. 
