
Intimate Talks of the Master*
BY  PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI

 

GOD has to be real manifested use. God has to be Real Life Impersonal. God has to bring-in in Use in usó Him as our One. As the I in Use in us, He as One, is the manifestation imperative in us. It has to be, Him, in Use in us, for Use of HimóHim as human creation and as Pure Being.
Shri Meher Baba here states mystically: ìIt is false conception to think that the I impersonal is Absolute. No-one is Absolute until
*Continued from November issue.
 

in Me realized. No-one is Absolute until in Me seen, known and reacted. I, here do the manifesting reacting reaction in use impersonal in I in- dividual. To create, to live, to do, to show, to act, to react the I, as us real, I do Me. Real in Use, I give Me to use in	UseóMe.	Me	in	Use,	is Manifestation Real of I as One as Truthóas God."
He here speaking, is Use in us as Verb. He in us is Verb that makes form. Indivisible
 

 
in us He is in Use One. Indivisible   in us He is Use in I. Imperative in Use, He here now  is  the New  Life in us that have to evolve in Use in  us, to realize in Use in usó'us', the New Mind, the New I. The new conscious mind in us shall bring-in in Useóthe New I as the Oneness Conscious Individual. As the real human experience in us, shall we as human creatures know him to be the I Impersonal. To all who win in I Impersonal have the expansion in Being this is to show that in I Imperative is the One in I as Portion in no way real, and Use imperative, but in I Impersonal as One-in-I Use Real it is Use-One-Direct when One- in-I has realized in Use One-in-I.  Him the Pure Human Personal One. To all the students in I Impersonal it is of use real and true to see the difference, as One in I is One as I when one is in Him the Personal manifestation Indivisible. Imperative in I as Use Oneóresigned.
It is a long way to strive and a long act in resignation impersona1 to show in Use in I individual till one is in I Impersonal Real and true Self in Manifested Real Order in
 
mind in Being. Those we here see, struggle in I Impersonal for Use of them impersonal it is far too  indivisible in realization reaction to pursue. No one is able to pursue in I impersonal the I Indivisible and Imperative, as in all the four use making Ióreactions as Use one, is mind individual the imperative indivi- dual opposition. So it is time to resign in I Indivisible, in I Impersonal, in I Imperative, in I as Use impersonaló for Himóthe Realization Impersonal Real as Human Being. That is all one has to realize here now in His life as Presence immutable Real One. He has to be in Use in us the Manifestation Imperative as winning order to live in- divisible in Being. To give individual in experience our I. So it is our I, here, now that we have to sacrifice in Use impersonal for Use of Him.
Shri Meher Baba as Realization Impersonal in Use in us is doing the New Dispensation impersonal for Use individual. He is One-in-All as life indivisible in Use. This is to love. To love is to live in Use One in I; I indivisible for Use of all.
Here, He the selfless Pure Will says the Verb that has to
 

 
realize in us the Truth: "Love Me more than your own I, love Me for Use in all, as in all I am the One as Portion Indivisible. Use Me to use you. Use Me to serve the impersonal One-in-I as you, the Indivisible portion. Live, for Use in Me the I in Use in One. See in I imperative in One the Use impersonal in I, in Use in all. Oneness is manifestation imperative in I as Use One as experience realóLove Unselfish. Love Me for Use in I indivisible One, in I individual. Love in I indivisible the I Impersonal for Use One.
I here say it in you the disciple. Here Baba replies: ìIt is imperative that you the disciple as Use imperative in Me resigned, be One in Use in I Individual for Use individual. To serve Me, be My One. To serve Me, be the I Individual that you owe to shine. Be indivisible in Use in I in Being as Life individual. No one is Use in Four in 'I-Use-in-One' in I as Portion Indivisible, until in Me realized. So it is Me who is doing the realization and no more the indivisible I the I impersonal. So it is clear in I in you here now that it is imperative to fall-in in Me,
 
to be in Use in I Imperative as  Me  the Identification of I Impersonal in Being, and in  I  individual  as creature, that is in duo-reaction resigned to have in use no real Use. To see this is to see  in  Me,  how  it  is that I am the Realization-Use Imperative. I here, as War in I individual am the realization reaction, I here in you as Striving Ióam the Realization reaction. I here as you individual in pain, am the divine  wrath to pursue in pain the real I, the One in I, the No-one in I.
The  pursuing I, as Use Oneóis Me in all. I here state this to show in I impersonal in you, the One-in-I- Use individual for Use of I individual that is to be My life, here now in Use. This is to all of Use to real and true understand, as man in  I individual here, now, is in real rebellion in I individual and in this is the sure sign that it is I who in rebellion is doing in undoing the Realization reaction. So be in use in One-in-I, simple, and in Use in I indivisibleóOne in Use; and in I individual show to win in I individual the unconscious I, as Use individual. Let it be real and true the Realization impersonal in you in I impersonal
 


 
for Use for I indivisible and in I individual let it be the I as One as Me. That is to personify in four in One-I- Useóthe Realization Order in Use. To live in I individual is to live in I Impersonal. To live in I indivisible is to live in I Imperishable. It is indivisible realization reacting in Four in I ways in Use, till in One- in-I as Use One, for use of I, the personification Imperative resigned. This is all to be the show for Me here now as Me Manifestation Individual.''
He is the Expansion in us, as the New I. He in us is the experience  of Him the New Individual. He in us is Use as the Manifestation in Real- ization reaction. He is the I-Use of us individual. We real and true
 
show in us the rising real sign of life divine in Being. We see in the Inner I as Use Indivisible OneóUs, move- in in Him the House of Real Life in Fulfilment. God is Use. God is Us. God is any one in Use for Use of Truth. God is here in our I for Use One, the Manifested One as Him our Beloved. As Him the Real One in I in Use in us is the Divine Mercy doing in Grace the Real- ization Imperative in Use here now. God in us is Life in Compassion. In Being in Compassion it is Himó the Real Redeeming One, in Use in all. God in Use, is descended  to live in Use in us as Truth. God is here to manifest in us in Realization Reaction. God is I. God is All.
 




 
