
Anna Kingsford and Symbolism in the West* 
[Adapted by Will Backett (London)] 
ANNA KINGSFORDíS prose writings are no less inspired than the Hymns to the Gods, for she writes with authority compelling by its innate power and without 
dogma.  Of  the  relationship  
between  soul  and  body  she  
says:ó  

''Soul is the effect of the body, for organism is before function, and the mineral before man . . . . Yet organism is the effect of idea and mind is the cause of evolution. So that spirit is before matter in its abstract, but not in its concrete conception.'' 
As to the nature of God:ó "Is God Impersonal? Yes, if the word personal be taken in its radical meaning, but personal in its highest and truest sense of that word, if the conception be of essential consciousness. For God has no limitations. God is pure and naked fire burning in infinity, 
ï 
whereof a flame exists in all creatures and the Kosmos. (The Apple in the hand of Venus, who is celestial harmony, represents the Kosmos sustained and redeemed by Love.) 
The Kosmos is a tree of innumerable branches, origin≠ating in one stem, and nourished by one root. . . . Life is the elaboration of soul through the various transformation of matter. . . . But for creation there would be one vast diffused and unindividuated consciousness. To God, everything is good. It is only to men that evil appears positive." 
To minds, seeking to quiet their mental unrest, or disturbed about orthodox limitations, such utterances bring a sense of freedom, and wider vistas. Shri Baba warns us, however that "God-realization is not to 

confused with intellectual convict≠ions, concerning God and Creation, just as head is not to be confused with hairs, or the substance with the shadow." 
Symbolism meets a need of enquiring minds as well as awakening hearts opening new realms to both mind and aspiration, and giving access to ancient truths, through a common language but concealing from others spiritual mysteries, for which however they are being prepared by the imagery and force which give true symbols potency. One aspect of Mars, but rarely conceded, is the association of the god of war with the horse, which the Romans depict in their sacrifices, and also in the chariot drawn by a furious team. Horses suffered death in war, as do the warriors, and as the horse, no one plane, symbolises the intellect, its association with Mars (who re≠presents the death of the lower ego of the pilgrim on the Path) emphasises that in death of intellect, its pre-eminence being dethroned, precedes the birth of spiritual wisdom, and thus heralds the age of the Intuition, which Shri Baba has told us, is approaching. 
There is a legend in connection with Jesus, that the horse refused to carry Him, and the ass did so instead and was therefore blessed, the horse being cursed and this may be a garbled representation of the truth that the intellect alone cannot realize the Christ. "It is the Christ Who is the culmination of the human stream, which flows upward into the bosom of the Father, and in the Christ, man finds his highest development as man, through whom also the manifestation Adonai of the Son of God is possible.'' 
''Strong art Thou, and adorable Phúbus Apollo, who bearest life and healing in Thy wings, who crownest the year with Thy bounty, and givest the spirit of Thy divinity to the fruits and precious things of all the worlds .... 
''Thy sign is the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and of the just made perfect, for they were constrained by Love to abandon the outer elements, and to seek the innermost which is undivided, even the Wisdom of God. And Wisdom and Love are One.'' 
Phúbus (the "Sun behind the Sun ") is further described by Anna Kingsford, figuratively, in the Hymn from which the above extract is taken, as ''Sons of the innermost sphere, the Anointed of God, manifesting the Spirit of Wisdom", one aspect of the Godhead. 

Describing Hermes, the ''Physician of Souls", the mediator between the outer and the inner, the spirit of understanding, the Hymn to Hermes reads:ó 
"As a moving light between heaven and earth, as a white cloud assuming many places, He descends and rises, he guides and illumines, he transmutes himself from small to great, from bright to shadowy, from the opaque image, to the diaphanous mist. 
Star of the East, conducting the Magi, cloud from whose midst, the holy voice speaketh, by day a pillar of vapour, by night a shining flame. 
I 	behold thee, Hermes, Son of God, archangel, who hearest the rod of knowledge, by which all things in heaven or on earth are measured. 
Double serpents entwine it be≠cause as serpents they must be wise who desire God. 
And upon thy feet are living wings, bearing thee fearless through space, because they must be without dread to dare the void and the deep, who desire to attain and achieve.'' 
To his neophytes, Hermes gives this admonition:ó 
ìI would have you armed both with a perfect philosophy and with the power of the divine Life. 
But knowledge cannot prevail alone, and ye are not yet perfected. 
When the fullness of Time shall come, I will add unto you the power of the divine Life .... 
When the word shall come to you, be ready to obey. 
There is but one way to power, and it is the way of obed≠ience ....î 
One may pause to ask, "Who and what manner of people are these mystics and what is their place in every-day life?'' To Anna Kingsford, the ''body was the chamber of ordeal, and in it her soul was tried". Few mystically inclined can maintain a busy contact with the outer world and people of Western outlook with their restless aimlessness, without strain 

and suffering, made more sus≠ceptible when in touch with inner spheres, where life is the spirit of the gods, and the music of the spheres mingles with the sorrows of the world. She bore much with patience and fortitude, and her "Life" shows, Edward Maitland's self-effacement, for he says with deep understanding of her difficulties that the very intensity of her nature made her sometimes go to extremes, and she could not always maintain the heights she sometimes reached. 
When a student in Paris, the psychic conditions in the hospitals and laboratories for vivisection, affected her so much that she was unable to carry on her studies, and had to take a holiday in Italy to recouperate. Beneath that clear sky, in touch with the manifold glories of art and nature, her whole being seemed illumined, and this culminated at St. Marks in Venice. Through its symbols and emblems in architecture, sculpture and painting, the work of the mediÊval adepts, seers and prophets, she perceived the fundamental truth of which all religions are the veils, "Words are Veils," she wrote on another 
occasion, "Truth is only utterable by God to God.'' 
Thus unfolded the new gospel of Interpretation, which she and Edward Maitland devoted their lives to placing before the World. 
It is no wonder that inspiration came in this particular place, for Shri Baba has explained that it is one of the great spiritual centres in Europe. Sixty years later Baba was to bring his Eastern and Western disciples there, for his own spiritual work, when he pointed out to them in the Cathedral and in its architecture, the plan of the work of the Avatar in the world, and His relationship to His circle of closest disciples. 
As a woman, Anna Kingsford's sympathy is shown when a medical student by her gift of violets to a little patient in hospital, in response to his appeal on his fingers, for he was deaf and dumb, for something to counteract the odours from the ointment on his wounds. The physician in charge noticed the flowers when making rounds of the wards, and asked, somewhat severely, who had given them. She hung back, frightened by his tone, 

and a fellow-student replied for her. She was much relieved to hear ''Only a woman could have thought of doing such a thing. Not one of your Messieurs, would have thought of bringing flowers to a sick child in the wards." 
Unconsciously, she shone in that company. "Tall, slender and graceful in form, she had the appearance, almost, of a Greek goddess, fair and exquisite in complexion, bright and sunny in expression, with long golden hair and dark brows and lashes, mouth and nose exquisitely formed and delicate, and eyes deep set and hazel. Radiant she became in speech, with a rich musical voice, eloquent when dealing with a subject dear to her heart. 
Her intellectual gifts were no less marked. She passed all her examens with the highest credits, in the shortest possible time, in spite of the handicap of sex in a city like Paris, where she had to study, as London was barred to women medical students in those days. The thesis she should have delivered before the general faculty and medical students as a whole, was refused at first, not because it was un≠
scientific, but because, she had chosen an exposition of a vegetarian diet in which she demonstrated the non-carni≠vorous nature of man, from his moral constitution and physical structure; though not directly condemning vivisection it obviously implied on moral grounds that it also was indefensible. She was told that the introduction of the moral aspect was against the attitude of an important person in the medical world whom they could offend. Eventually the authorities compromised by hearing the Thesis privately before a few examiners and her friends, and one of the former, as compliment to her, invited her to a vegetarian dejeuner. Her versatility is indi≠cated by another incident in the hospital, when a professor asked for a sketch of a new apparatus he was experimenting for the first time, and them in use which he had designed, and wished to have recorded. None of the students complied, but one who had seen Anna Kingford's other sketches, persuaded her to attempt this drawing. In a hour she returned with it, and the rush of students as she entered the ward, made 

the professor ask to see what they were looking at. 
"Comment Madame, c'est vous qui fait cela? Vous dessinez ce facon la?" Showing it to other doctors and surgeons, he exclaimed heartily, ''If I were in your place, I would go in for art, not medicine. A young lady who can draw like this all in an hour, a medical student?î 
Some of her illuminations were published in her earlier book The Perfect Way, or the Finding of the Christ, which is probably wider known, as it embodied a wider conception of the "Christ Within", than orthodoxy, and included many 
of her lectures arranged in sequence to illustrate the growth and culmination of consciousness, which the Church teaching points to, and the saints achieve. The formation of the Hermetic Society, after she had severed her connection with a movement that did not emphasize to the same degree the continuity of thought between the West and East, con≠tinued to bring her into touch leaders in the reforms that were taking shape at the end of the nineteenth century, and the late W. 
T. Stead,  Editor of the Pall Mall Gazette, gave in his paper a detailed account of the objects of the Society, and Anna Kingsford's activities. An American section was formed in Boston: in Paris, contact was maintained with the Anti-Vivisection Society, of which Victor Hugo was President and Anna Kingsford a foremost supporter, and she continued her lectures for them and on the same subject in England. Her collected essays and lectures on Veget≠arianism and her Dreams and Dream Stories also had a wide circulation. 
The Mystic sees in Demeter, Pallas Athene, Hephaistos, and Poseidon, behind and within the four elements of earth, air, fire, and water, as Anna Kingsford expresses:ó 
''And Thou, Demeter, fair Earth Mother, whose bosom the patient on treadeth, whose hands are full of plenty and blessing .... 
Angel of the crucible, guardian of the dead, who makest and unmakest, who combinest and dissolvest, who bringeth forth life out of death and transformeth all bodiesÖ 

Who makest the volatile to be fixed, whether in the great or in the small, whether in the outer or the inner. 
Who yokest the cattle of the field to Thy plough, for Thy dominion is of the field, O Daughter of Time: Thou bindest not the sons of the air and sea. 
But to the gross Thou art gross, and to the subtle, Thou art subtle." 
The Hymn to Pallas Athene, 
breathes the widsom of Pente≠costal prophecy and her spear and shield are fashioned for the soul of man:ó 
"Immaculate Mother of the word of prophecy, symbol of the holy essence, goddess of the Êgis and the spear. 
Spirit of the whirlwind, secret breather of wisdom, fortifier of the soul inspirer of armies: 
Shining maid by whose spear we vanquish, for interior wisdom thrustest all things through; by whose shield we are covered, for interior purity preserveth from all contagion. 
By thine aid, O armed winged wisdom, Thy servant shall smite the lust of the world, upon whose beauty who so looketh is changed into stone, who feedeth upon the souls of men. 
Be praised O Athena, be praised Thou and Thy wheel; be praised in the great and the small, in the outer and the inner, invisible and immaculate spirit of life." 
* * * Anna Kingsford must have felt 
herself akin to Hephaistos as 
there was much in her own 
activity and energy of a fiery 
nature:ó 
"Hephaistos, whose symbol is the red lion, Lord of the Serpent, the flame, and of the secret parts of the earth. 
He blindeth and deludeth the eyes of men, he encom≠passeth the foolish with illusions, and smiteth the feeble with madness. 
Serve not the fire nor the crystal, and be not undone by their secrecy. 
For the spirits of lust and illusion obey the crystal, and they who love the light of it, shall fall under the dominion of Lucifer. 
The fire shall be quenched by the water, and the water shall be resolved into spirit. 

By fire is the Initiate baptised, by fire the oblation is salted, and the flame shall devour the dross of the crucibleÖÖÖ 
That which endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.'' * * * 
The mystery of Life, Anna Kingsford presents in the Hymn to Poseidon:ó 
"Behold the manifold waves of the Sea, which rise and sink, Which break and are lost, and follow each other continually: Even as these are the trans≠mutations of the soulÖÖÖ 
For the soul is one substance, as is the water of the deep, whose waves thou canst not number, neither tell their shapes, 
for the form of them passeth away. Even as these are the incarnations of the Soul." * * * 
The Seer whose wisdom is preserved in the Chaldean Oracles, has said:ó 
"The Paternal Mind has sowed symbols in the Soul. Having mingled the Divine Spark from two according substances, Mind and Divine Spirit, as a third to these He added Holy Love, the venerable Charioteer, uniting All Things." 
