
We are living in an age which is characterised by the interming-­‐ ling of diverse civilizations and cultures. Most of them find their inspiring spirit in some historical religion. The historical religions may in principle be divided into two types: Both the types require
(1)    faith    in    the    existence  of
 

than the bare allegiance to this higher principle. They also sanction and require the in-­‐ dividual to perform duties towards the great society  of which he is a member.
Along with these types of outlook which have been our legacy from the past, there is  also
 
something individual recognition him. But important type,   this
 
higher than  the  self,    and    (2)     the of its claims  upon they differ in one respect. In the first higher    principle   is
 
widely current an outlook which does not claim to be religious and derives its inspiration from science rather than from religion. It recognises the innumerable sufferings     of     humanity,     and
 
looked upon as a perfect and infinite personality or God (as in Christianity). And in the second type the higher principle is regarded as being some impersonal goal or law ( as in the case of Buddhism). These two types of religion are also found to intermingle with one another in varying proportions (as in the case of the different folds of Hinduism). Further, both types of religion require something more
 
wishes to avoid them by securing cooperative and connected  action. And it is content to leave heaven and angels to themselves. This outlook has gained such  wide popularity, because it contains some elements of value from which it derives its vitality. An the future Universal Religion, as anticipated by the Teaching of Shri Meher Baba, will incorporate in itself the elements of value which  are  present  not  only in
the great historical religions but also in this `scientific' outlook.
Let us first examine the sense in which Universal Religion is possible.		Realization		of		God, which gives the  individual  a secure basis for an integrated and harmonious life, is purely a personal matter, and it cannot be imposed		on	the		individual through any social institutions. No amount of external insti-­‐ tutional instruction can guaran-­‐ tee to the individual the synthesis of values and the poise between reason and love which it involves. God has to be realised by the individual			through		an	inner awakening and an earnest search and effort. Institutions at best can serve as tools for interchange of experience. But God-­‐realization always	remains		a		personal matter. All that can be done through		social		effort	is		the creation of an atmosphere which will facilitate such realization. It cannot be directly made universal. In so far as religion consists of certain dogmas,  beliefs,  creeds and rituals, it has  no  potentiality to become universal.  This  aspect of religion  is  directly  derived from  the  diverse  traditions which
 
are peculiar to the different  peoples of the world. And the futility of the proselitysing propaganda which has been vigorously carried on by the followers of different religions for centuries should be sufficient to convince us about the impos-­‐ sibility to secure for this aspect of religion  universal  acceptance.  That is why Shri Meher Baba does not attach any importance to dogmas,  beliefs,  creeds  or rituals.
It is neither desirable nor possible for any one historical religion to become universal by extirpating other religions. The Universal Religion, as fore-­‐ shadowed in the Teaching of the Master, will synthesise and not merely blindly reject the values of the  various  historical  religions. The historical religions are all  paths towards the Truth. But the tragedy about their actual functioning has been that  they  have tended to become more and more exclusive, and thus, in the long run,  have  denied  the universal and  comprehensive vision of their founders. Truth is  not an exclusive  prerogative  of  any one religion, and the coming Universal  Religion,  therefore,
 
cannot take a hostile or patronizing attitude towards any historical religions. What we require is a more catholic attitude which would not only tolerate all shades of opinion on religious topic, but which will actively try to understand and appreciate the diverse points of view. Religion should not divide man and man, as it has tended to do in the past, but it should, on the contrary, be  a cementing power that holds together people of diverse opinions.
Shri Meher Baba does not  seek to establish a new sect, thus adding to the number of sects already existing in the world, but will be truly comprehensive. In the light of his Teaching, the individual will not live for the self alone, nor will he live for any narrow sect. But he will live a life of love which knows no distinctions, and he will try to realize the common good, not because of any ties of common mythology or a set of rituals, but because of a clear recognition of the unity of all individuals in the infinite life of God. Love for God and love for man will constitute the animating spirit of this Universal Religion. It will thus not
 
derive its inspiration from the shadowy  prospects   concerning the other world, but will  essentially be a Religion of Life. It will not exclude any  of  the  intrinsic values of life, but will comprehend within its scope all scientific, artistic and cultural pursuits. It will leave every individual completely free to  realize God in his own way. The Paths will always differ  according to individual temperaments ; but each Path will ultimately lead the individual to the Goal which is universal, although the reali-­‐ zation of that  Goal  will,  as  we have seen, always  remain  personal.
The Universal Religion of the future is not comparable to the achievement of a result like the establishment of an  empire.  It will not be some definite event after the occurrence of which men may again go to sleep. It would merely release the Divine Life and Energy which today is locked up in most human beings. After this release life will still go on as ever, renewing itself every moment. It will be truly creative, unoppressed by the frozen past, or by the unknown future. And it will be infinitely rich and full,
because humanity will have attained to perpetual youth. This eternally self-­‐refreshing spirit is the very main spring of the Creative Religion of life which the Master brings.
The way for inheriting this spiritual gift of Shri Meher Baba is, however, beset with innumerable difficulties. The world as it is today is full of chaos because of warring sections of humanity which has been divided on the basis of (1) classes, (2) nationality, (3 race, (4) religion and (5) culture. We thus find throughout the structure of the modern world innumerable pernicious distinctions which are based upon economic, social, political and cultural competition. The only way out of this chaos is to transcend these narrow differences through Universal Love. The urgent need for solving this	world-­‐problem	has impressed itself upon us by the tragic catastrophe of the last Great War which was like a tremendous conflagration which threatened to consume the whole world by its flames. The legacy which the Great War gave to us is not, however, all evil. After the closing  of  the  War,  we began to
 
reflect upon its causes, and set ourselves to discover ways of avoiding any such future catastrophes.
In our times the whole world has really become one. There is economic and spiritual action and reaction between all  its parts, and it is impossible to ignore this fact. nation or a race can no longer be regarded as being a self-­‐ sufficient and isolated unit. Our individual and social activities must, therefore, be organised on the basis of co-­‐operation rather than of competition. We must put forth	our	united	efforts		for counteracting the old ideas of narrow		patriotism		and	petty loyalties, and carry on a vigorous propaganda in favour of the recognition of  the  claim  which the  whole  human  brotherhood has upon us all. We  can  thus create		a	general		sense		of international responsibility. The real problem lies in the  urgent need for forming intelligent and healthy world-­‐opinion, and this is Herculian task. There will be a need for innumerable organi-­‐ zations and service-­‐leagues, in every part of the globe, and the activities of these organizations will have to be co-­‐ordinated, so  as
to	secure	harmonious	and effective	action,		planned		by reason and inspired by love. There will be a need for setting afoot a number	of		movements		or currents of vitalizing thought, so that by and by the whole of humanity will become conscious of its unity as an organic whole. It is true that all the historical religions  have  been  attemptin the same stupendous task. But their efforts have obviously not been crowned with success. The amount of selfless zeal and enthusiasm	as		well	as	the unflickering faith in life which are required for achieving unification of humanity can only come from the inspiration derived from a living Perfect Master like Shri Meher Baba.
Unification		of	humanity, however, is not our only problem. We have to attempt much more than this, viz. the rejuvenation of the modern world. The whole of humanity will have to go through kind of spiritual rebirth in order to inherit the new life for the dispensation of which the New Avatar of Shri Meher Baba has come. This spiritual rebirth may be	difficult	for	the	older
generation, because their minds
 

are burdened by the dead weight of meaningless traditions. Their vision is limited by the social distinctions to which their minds have got accustomed. They have been caught up in grooves and they have lost the capacity to face the problems of life with a fresh and an unbiased mind. The young men and women are free from this burden and limitation. They are in position to face modern problems of life with an attitude which is both critical and constructive. And if they set themselves to this task in the  right spirit, they will conserve all the elements of value which have been inherited by us from the past, and also absorb the vitalising Gospel of Shri Meher Baba.
In the present distressing and gloomy atmosphere which envelops humanity today, our only hope lies in Shri Meher Baba. It is true that we are confronted with many volcanic and disruptive forces of mutual fear and hatred which work for chaos. But nothing is impossible for a generation of young men and women whose imagination  is fired by the vision of the Truth as revealed
by the Master. Inspired by the We have to promote an outlook ideal of selfless service, they  can    which will not merely be consis-­‐      apply their energies to the task of tently pacifist but will positively counteracting these forces of be quickened by the spirit of disruption.  This  work   is comp-­‐    active  love  for    humanity  as  a    arable   to   the   action   of   Ulysses     whole.  The  ship  of  humanity  will who got bound in "Aeol's Bag," all       thus  arrive  at  the  completion  of     the  winds  except  that  which  was         its     pilgrimage     by     realizing     a to take his ship to  its destination.	Comprehensive      and      Universal
Religion of Life.
