 
Notes from My Diary
BY   F.  H.  DADACHANJI
 
SPEECHES AT MADRAS
ON their way to Nagpur, Dr. and Mrs. C. D. Deshmukh stopped at Madras for a day and took the opportunity to deliver a lecture in the Master's Ashram (Retreat)óThe Meherashramóat Saidapet, on the afternoon of the 12th November 1939. Mr. C. V. Sampath Aiyangar (Retd. Judge, Madras Judicial Service) presided.
After introducing the learned speakers of the day, Mr. C. V. Sampath Aiyangar said:
Shri Meher Baba is not unfamilar to some of you. He came here to  open His Ashram, and planted the tree under which much useful work  is being done. We consider him as a World Teacher specially  incarnated at this critical time when the world is undergoing terrible suffering. This is the time when we should burn all bridges behind us. We should not waver. The great Master is ready to help us, if we surrender ourselves
 
to him. He is not come to establish any new religion. He has come to awaken the Isvara (God), who is in us. It is not easy for the individual soul to understand this great spiritual Truth: unity in diversity. Maya, instead of taking us to the centre, makes the circumference, in which we are bigger and bigger. A Perfect Master alone can help us in cleansing our sanskaras. By his help and contact, we can progress spiritually in our own religion. Shri Baba says, "To change our outward religion for another is like going from one cage to another". A Hindu can, rejecting the mere outward forms, enter the spiritual path in his own religion. And so a Christian, a Mohammedan and so on.
Shri Baba's Universal Ashram is a Spiritual Academy. This unique institution, to be established at Byramangala, 22 miles from Bangalore, will consist of six departments, which will be under the direct supervision of Shri Baba.
 

 
There will be a resting place for the afflicted. For meditation there  will be solitary quarters. There will be a house for advanced Souls, and so on. The foundation will be laid on the 17th December and you are cordially invited.
We all work for Shri Baba and for the spiritual regeneration of the world. His secret is the elimination  of our ego, and then alone universal brotherhood the stepping-stone for God-realization will be possible.  May you all understand His Message and spread it.
After the introductory speech by Mr. C. V. Sampath Aiyangar, Dr.  C.
D. Deshmukh spoke as follows:
"I am very happy to be in the midst of a group which is spiritually minded. I can do nothing better than speaking to you about what it has meant to me to have met my Master, Shri Meher Baba. Meeting the  Master is entering a new life. We are mostly skipping on the surface of  life and rarely make any serious effort to find out or realise the ultimate purpose of life. To meet the Master is to be initiated by him on  the Spiritual Path. Life can never be the same aimless thing
 
to a person who has once had the privilege of seeing Spiritual Perfection in Shri  Meher  Baba. After meeting the Master, the only desire which the aspirant has is to be taken up into his universal Cons- ciousness."
Mrs. Indumati Deshmukh, M.A., B.T., then addressed the audience at the special request of the President, Mr. Sampath Aiyangar. In an excellent speech, she particularly emphasised the aspect of the  Masterís infinite and divine Love as seen in his work in connection with the Masts (God-mad). She said:
"Even those who are not parti- cularly spiritually  inclined  cannot but be impressed by the intense and super-normal love of Shri Meher Baba. His love is particularly impressive when it is seen in his  work about the Mad-Masts. No man can respond to them and look after them as he does."
The  last  speaker  of  the  evening,
V. T. Lakshmi, M.A., B.T., M.R.A.S., who is doing splendid service in the Madras Presidency for the unfor- tunate "fallen women", gave an impressive speech in Tamil for about half an hour. She said:
 

"The world is in a  pell-mell. There is chaos and confusion, all over. Discontent and restlessness characterise the life of every individual, family, community and nation. Everyone says that the world is a veritable hell! Take for instance an individual; he is uneasy and unhappy. There is disharmony in every family, which leads to sad and everlasting sordid results. There is again the communal discord which is marring the peace and unity among the communities. There is also the political animosity, caused by self- aggrandisement and mean exploit- ation of the helpless minoritiesó those drifting nations all over the world. Lastly, there is the maladjust- ment of economic factors  which have led to a state of appalling economic factions and disputes, neither of which are wholesome for the smooth and disciplined growth of the history of the world! Is there anyone in this assembly to aver that there is an individual who is thoroughly happy? Go  to  a  village or to a town; do you not see the pitiable and tangible results of poverty and destitution, due to ill- distribution of production and mal- classification of the
 
available wealth in the  country? Who is blind to the multitudinous injurious customs and conventions, the observance of which is doubtless undermining the very existence of  our society? Who is not aware of the Hindu-Muslim discord and the Hindus' aversion for their Harijan brethren? And who is not exper- iencing the ghastly results of the present European War? Is there any doubt that the world is in a melting pot? Who is responsible for this lamentable state? God or man? God made the world to be a training ground for the individual's self- evolution; but it is man who has made the world topsy-turvy, because of his limitations and narrow- mindedness due to his Godlessness! Therefore, the man who marred the Godly peace of the world, alone should work up for its regeneration and reformation with 'heart within and God overhead'.
I for one, have been engaged in  the sacred work of alleviating the terrible sufferings of young girls and women, whom the world spurns as the 'fallen women' and who  suffer for a 'mutual wrong'. By the way, it  is a pity that
 
we still observe that moral sin in a woman is graver than that in a man. This double standard of morality is the surest basis for several heinous social customs, like child marriage, child-widowhood, desertion of widows or wives and polygamy among men. The gross injustice that Society is doing these poor women who are more sinned against than sinning, without a thought for repar- ation and the despicable misery that these victims suffer, convince me that at least the social world, even if not other fields, needs an over- hauling at an early date. No individual nor even groups can bring it about, without God's grace or without a Godly Man to guide them in their arduous task. And that Godly Man and that Man of the hour, some of us feel because of our
 
guru but a friend and guide, who knows and sympathises with our weaknesses and yet helps us to overcome them. We, Shri Meher Baba's disciples or admirers, feel that it is our incumbent duty to gather in our fold as many true and loyal men and women, as is possible, in a band, so that we shall all gird up our loins and work for the amelioration of mankind.
Believe in what we say or not, but give us a patient hearing; deliberate over it and act as your conscience dictates. With an open mind, approach Shri Meher Baba. Study His literature. Understand Him. If you think that you can, you may serve Him and His cause which is the world's cause and God's too, just as we do. If not, leave it at that!"
 
personal  experience  and deliberate	 	
convictions,  is  Shri  Meher  Baba.
 
Above all castes, creed and colour and personification of Love, He has come not to teach but to awaken us to do our duty. He is one who believes in example rather than in precepts. He is humble and expects us all to be so. He loves us all and expects us to rise above pettiness and hatred. He is not a teacher or
 
FROM DAY TO DAY
Ever since the arrival at Bangalore, three months ago, Baba has been busy in two most impor- tant worksópreparations for start- ing the Universal Spiritual Centre for external activities, and the search after the Masts (God-mad) and
 


service to them with his own hands, for the internal work.
THE FOUNDATION DAY OF THE UNIVERSAL SPIRITUAL CENTRE
The Spiritual Centre is to be the nucleus of all Meher Baba's external activities. These were uptil now carried on rather in a private way and conducted in quiet places away from the hum-drum of life. And although, at certain periods during the last decade and a half, the Master was running a big colony of over 400 people and conducting different institutions of public utility, touching every phase of life, viz., a free hospital and a dispensary, a leper asylum, a boarding school with over a hundred boys, a Dharm- asala (resting place), etc., all these were established in a quiet corner and run without any tom-tom (noise) in public, so that these were little known to the outside world except to the intimate number of his group.
It is for the first time, Baba's external activities, uptil now  quiet,
 

seem to have assumed a public aspect.
The Spiritual Centre, of  which the Master had been telling long since, has now taken practical shape. The site has been selected, extensive area of 600 acres of land has been purchased, plans made out and the actual construction work for the first two blocks commences from the 18th of  December,  after the laying of the foundation by his august hands on the 17th December 1939 at Byramangala, in the presence of the illustrious Dewanó Sir Mirza Ismail, and a large num- ber of State Officials and amidst a gathering of several thousands representing the elite of the Mysore State as well as the town's people and peasants of the district. An interesting account of the Foundation-Day function will be given in our next issue.
Meanwhile, Meher Baba's special Message given for the occasion and read out by one of his disciples, is reproduced here:
