
Once, while Bhagwan Vishnu was resting and chatting with the sage Narad, the  latter  asked  Shri Vishnu why all the shastras (religious scriptures ) attach so much importance to Sant-­‐ darshana (the sight of saints). Evading a straight answer, Shri Vishnu asked Narad to go to a particular jungle and put the question to a lizard he would find there.
Narad, in obedience to Shri Bhagwan's orders, went to the jungle specified, and finding the lizard mentioned, put the question uppermost in his mind. The lizard, instead of giving an answer as foretold by Shri  Vishnu, suddenly dropped down dead. Narad was very much bewildered, and returning to Shri Bhagwan,  communicated  all that
ad happened.
Shri Bhagwan asked Narad to forget the incident, and this time he asked him to approach a  parrot in another part of the jungle. Like the lizard, the parrot too, at the very sight of Narad, dropped  down  dead  before the
 
question was half uttered. Narad felt very much disappointed and related the happening to Shri Bhagwan.
Lord Vishnu spoke words of solace to Narad and urged upon him to continue his quest which was likely to yield him an answer to his question. On this occasion Narad was directed to the house of patel (headman) of a certain village and was told to put his question to the newly born colt of a mare in the household. Narad was scared at the prospect of the previous experience being repeated, and voiced his fears in the matter to Shri Bhagwan. Lord Vishnu asked Narad if he had full faith in him, and on getting a  reply in the affirmative, admonished him to carry out his orders faithfully.
Narad went to the house of the patel as ordered, and the latter being very religious-­‐minded, received the sage very kindly and reverentially. After a little rest and refreshments, the patel respectfully inquired as to what had brought the august feet of the sage to his humble dwelling.
 
Narad replied that he had come with the particular object of seeing the newly born colt about which he had heard so much. The request was simple enough and was easily granted. No sooner Narad saw the colt, it expired at the very sight of him. The patel was greatly upset at the loss but took it philosophically, as due to just a stroke of ill  luck  or accident. Narad, escaping himself as best as he could from the awkward situation by uttering a few words of sympathy  and solace to the patel, retraced his steps hurriedly to the Master.
Bhagwan Vishnu, who knew everything, offered comfort and encouragement to Narad by saying, "You have attempted thrice but failed, for no fault of yours. Try once again by going to the newly born child of a particular king of a neighbouring kingdom. This child will furnish you the answer you seek." Narad felt very much frightened at the possible outcome of this new venture, and made bold to say, "Sire, it was easy enough for me  to extricate myself from previous predicaments; if the baby were to die  at the sight of me,  the  king is
 

not likely to forgive me. There is no chance of my coming out alive." On being assured of success and protection by Shri Bhagwan, Narad left once again on his divine quest.
Narad approached the king who happened to be a lover of saints, and was received right royally. After entertaining the sage sumptuously the king inquired as to what more he  could do to please the saintly guest. Narad expressed his desire to see the newly born prince, at which the king felt very much flattered	and	honoured. Immediately the king  escorted the sage into his harem and showed the baby lying in the golden cradle suckling the toes of the feet.
Narad felt much relieved to find the baby alive at the sight of him and put him the question he was out to seek an answer for.  The baby in the cradle only  looked at him listlessly and smiled. He repeated the question thrice and every time he was answere by a nonchalant smile. Getting exasperated Narad addressed the baby thus, "Why  do you smile? Can't you understand

me? Why don't you reply to my question?"
On hearing this, the baby was miraculously endowed with the power of speech. At  first,  the baby indulged in a hearty laugh, and then said to Narad, "Your question has already been answered by me." On being further pressed to explain, the baby said, "The explanation is so very simple. You yourself are a saint, and luckily in my life on earth as a lizard I got your darshana (sight) which enabled me to avoid many forms and rebirths in the course of my evolutionary progress. I at once assumed the form of a parrot. I again was blessed with your darshana while
 
living the life of a parrot, and that enabled me to be reborn immediately in the form of a colt. While I was a colt, you again appeared before me, and the blessed meeting has resulted in my attaining the present human form that you now see. Such  is the effect and spiritual benefit of Sant-­‐darshana!"
If  mere Sant-­‐darshana  (sight of saints ) means all that is stated above and enables one  to  skip over  numerous  evolutionary  forms and stages, then what must be the potency of Sat-­‐sang (company of saints)? Blessed indeed are those who are voluntarily roughing life in the company of the perfect Master of the     time,     Shri     Meher      Baba.
 

