 
This man on the move is neither the average Mr. America nor the average Mr. India. He has just dropped into this world from nowhere, and is on the move. 
Shall we then start him from the west coast of America where life is in a hurricane rush both in business and pleasure pursuits, where mankind thinks without having time to think, where wives and husbands are exchanged in accordance with the fad they have of changing cars every year? Where a thing of beauty is a joy short-lived and not for ever. Where nine out of ten people say, "God is somebody who abounds nowhere and I am too busy." The man on the move smiles and moves a little East, but his is a sad smile. Here is a nation marching forward in feverish pounding speed, such speed that to them God's glories are in a blurr. Progress is their slogan which knows no end. But the man on the move knows of the end, the end of this frenzied march which will 
be so startling in its divine revelation that each would extend his hand around the world to meet in a shake-hand of world brotherhood with tears of joy in their eyes which for once would seem eternal. But then they are a nice people all in a hurry. 
Man on the move is in New York, a mighty city where everyone wants to make a mighty million overnight, knowing fully well, "You can't take it with you." Here life is full to the brim. But if they could only stop the sun, the clock or the earth going around for a few minutes, to look over their progress, they would find in a backward march, and life more empty than vacuum. But don't worry! Man on the move is not going to hold back any clock-hands. 
He is going East, riding the ocean waves in a luxury liner. Comfortable? Yes, most beautifully. As he nears the shores of the old world, he finds himself or rather his luxury liner amongst strings of dull grey men-of­war who seem to 

look down upon this liner with the eye of contempt and destruction. Here again a sad smile lurks on his face. He is in London where mankind is in just the same hurry as in the U. S. A. But here they are too self-centred. Even if a few peep out of their conservatism, their interest in questions such as, “Who and what is God?” is mere academical and not too deep. The majority, however, have no time to waste over Him. With them God is something of a communist trying to level out their thinking by demanding faith rather than reason, and hence they leave Him alone. Here again the man on the move smiles, but it is one of helplessness for the people which listen into too many voices all at once and hence cannot see light in its full sway; so they just carry on what they have been carrying on—a people which welcomes every other people and nothing to do with them. Here is a nation that is mighty and strong in character, but looks for the golden egg in its pocket while others are holding it right in the face, its conservatism carried to a point of silliness. A nation which is 
given a chance to understand God fails to do so out of sheer safety, first lest the suggestions of others might give them a leap in the dark, squeezes a pitiful smile out of the man on the move who is now in gay Paris. 
Paris…where everything is so gay that you can hardly partake of anything to your entire satisfaction. You don’t have to ask them regarding God, because the expected answer would be, “God? O, he is a jolly good fellow who says, ‘live and let live!’” So far this attitude is the best, but here life and love has lost its diviner ages and are replaced by commonplace vulgarism. 
To Berlin! … where every other man is a spy and all are out to K. O. those who ask too many questions, and should it be regarding God, the answer would be (with a bayonet tickling your ribs), “Don’t speak of Him, He is a hindrance to our ambitions.” The man on the move is shedding tears of pity, as he looks around to find the younger generation marching grimly to the tunes of the war-drums which they were taught the moment they peeped into this 

world—a people filled with an ambition to conquer and destroy. Their progress is in manufacturing of armaments to such a pitch as would be used for sheer threat without firing a single shot. But what if once this threat should fail? A people which has no reasons left but live on courageous hearts backed by the dictates of a man who is taking too many chances with too many lives—taking mean advantage of this noble race because of their stunned submission. The man on the move is still shedding tears, but now they are of blood, as he moves from Berlin to Prague, to Vienna and to Central Europe where peace-loving people are forced into a race for armaments, their liberty snatched away, and are forced to feel that all is the making of what mankind strives to make. They are all on tip-toes…They cannot escape God, nor can they escape the fact of the on-coming clouds of destruction. What can they do? Their inner voice cries out that what they are doing is sheer dissipation of both body and soul, but still they are doing it. They can’t help it. It’s a weary and bleeding 
heart that makes a noble and youthful arm strike mother-earth for one more trench. 
To Moscow…where every indivi­dual is considered a guinea-pig to be ruthlessly experimented upon by the doctors of the state…where an utterance of God would just about make a lifeless guinea-pig out of any body. The man on the move retreats with disgust, but he knows that this people shall learn to understand God but not without much harm to themselves by these experiences with human lives. 
To Italy…where things are just the same as in Berlin; and then to Madrid…a paradise on earth if only politics would leave this people alone. So far the man on the move hasn’t found a resting place, so he moves East through Palestine where a miserable but an intellectual people is trying to build a home, driven from all the corners of this earth. But here they are wittingly or unwittingly up against a more virile race, resisting with more right than might this planned poaching in their paternal preserve. 
Across the Arabian Sea to India…India where people be-

lieve in spiritual progress, where some are on the right track and some are misled by bogus sadhus who have whiskers reaching their huge waist­lines and move about in saffron­coloured robes, depriving the ignorant of their hard earned pies. In spite of this the man on the move finds that spirituality has got this people in its grip, though some are trying in vain to escape, influenced by their Western friends. Some queer things are going here. The man on the move finds people worshipping a stone with a dash of red paint on it, worshipping cows and bathing in rivers whose waters are considered soul-purifiers, although one observes with surprise that the city dirt is drained into these rivers. Millions throng in and out of the temples and along the river banks. Wherever the man on the move goes, his ears are filled with temple bells and soul-inspiring cries from the mosques. Why do they worship these stone pieces and cows and kiss the feet of saints of whom they know nothing? Here is the answer: Why do we worship these objects? Well, we really do not know.  
We are just led on by a call that is from within each of us, which our Western friends term as “blind faith” or “following in our father’s foot-steps”. Yes, we are a mass of uneducated, but all the same we feel the presence of God; we know He is here, there and everywhere; we do not want to see Him or His mighty court of angels…we just want to realise Him. We also know that when the end of this world comes, which will, our souls will be spared. We are not God’s chosen people, but a few are, and the rest are just God’s people, which is enough. This worshipping of objects probably is just every individual’s expression of his faithful belief in God. The man on the move feels like laughing loud, but then at the back of his mind he knows that all this is too true; it’s only the queer ways of worshipping that provoked laughter. It’s like a silly symphony. It seems so silly; but does it sound silly? The man on the move finds himself on a pile of cushions … He is so comfortable, everything around him is so peaceful and nobody seems in a hurry. He goes from city to 

 THE MAN ON THE MOVE 
city and dwells on the glory that was  dispelling the darkness of ignorance,  
past. But no. Glory is not to be found  and spreading the light of knowledge  
in tombs and palaces that lie in ruins  on the earthly plane.  
today. It’s the glory of the heart and  The man on the move is reluctant to  
the mind which lives on. From the  move off the shores of India. But then  
Himalayas to Cape Comorin it’s one  he must… and so to China. Once the  
string of saints and disciples marching  most cultured and civilized empire in  
towards the Light which the saints see  the world today reduced to an iota of  
and the disciples are yet to see. But  its former glory, pounded upon by its  
what of the universal mankind, and  ambitious neighbour which knows not  
who will show them this Light? There  that by slaughtering this harmless  
is a way out, because there is a  people they are marching into darkness  
Master—a Master among saints and a  and further away from God.  
Perfect Master who will show that  It’s journey’s end for the man on  
Light in all its splendour. The Perfect  the move: he can’t go on for ever. He  
Master abounds everywhere, but He  must settle down in a country where he  
has His abode in India from whence  can pass off his life’s evening in a  
the branches shoot out to every corner  glorious hush where he can strive to  
of this earth. Every man, woman and  make his soul noble and preach unto  
child is under this tree, but alas, many  those who shall give a willing ear. Of  
know it not how they are sheltered.  course to India where the Perfect  
The man on the move digs deep into  Master abides, where with every step  
history only to find that Prophets, one  you take you are being reclaimed,  
and all, and Saints, mighty and small,  where you can express your faith in  
were all born in the East, and that India  God in any form of worship you  
is one country nearest to the spiritual  please, and where God is so near. The  
firmament which shoots out stars of  man on the move is in India…and  
the first magnitude from time to time,  more near to himself.  
