
On 12th May 1939, in the evening, in front of the Town Hall, the intelligensia of Mandla received three talks on Shri Meher Baba and his work. The talks were presided upon by Rao Saheb Kekre. They were interpreted in Hindi by Mr. G.S. Agnihotri, the President of the Municipality of Mandia. The following is the summary of these talks. 
In the opening speech Dr. 
C.D. Deshmukh, Lecturer in Philosophy, said: "Shri Meher Baba has come with twofold purpose: the first purpose is to prepare humanity for true brotherhood which alone can ensure a life of selfless love and intelligent co-operation in all social and international affairs; and the second pur­pose is to help those who are ready to have more Light on the Path which takes the individual to his final destiny which is God-realization. We shall fail to understand the true significance of Baba and his work unless  we bring fresh mind to this task. He has not come to add to the weight of learning which in a way has dwarfed humanity from the spiritual point of view. Purely intellectual knowledge gives to the individual a pseudo-satis­faction of knowing, when, in fact, he has often not mastered even the ABC of spirituality. Shri Meher Baba appeals to something much deeper than the intellect. By his personal contact he awakens the heart; and the inspiration of his noble example leads us to a life of true Karma Yoga. Not only India but the whole world needs the Light which Shri Meher Baba brings. Those who get the opportunity of partici­pating in his stupendous task are indeed lucky." 
The next speaker was 
Countess Nadine Tolstoy, the 
daughter-in-law of the famous 
writer Count Leo Tolstoy. She 
spoke about her experiences of 
the Spiritual Path. She said: 
"The practices of certain dan­
gerous yogic methods even­tually led me to seek the help of a true Guru. Sadguru Shri Meher Baba has realized God and I find in him the Universal Guide who has that Divine Love which alone can bring us to God. His perfect guidance has rectified the harm which was done to me by my former practices, and it has awakened in me the pure spiritual vision of the living Truth and Love which are attainable through the elimination of the ego. When my husband Count Ilya Tolstoy met Baba, he said, "This is the first time that I have met a man who really has Divine Love." 

Surrenderance to the Master and the obedience of his orders secure what no disciplines or methods can ever give. When the follower is making sincere efforts, he gets the Grace of the Master and thereby receives just that spiritual help which he needs. The greatest seekers have failed to reach the ulti­mate goal, because they have had no proper guide. Count Leo Tolstoy is one of the most pathetic examples of this fact, inspite of his utmost struggle and search for the Truth. 
I find that the life in  Meher ashram under the guidance of Shri Meher Baba is the true school of spirituality. The purpose of all the activities of Baba is to bring out spirituality in life. He is at once the Lord and Servant of men; and he reveals by his example the meaning of the realization of the One Life in all its aspects and manifestations. I have observed his work with mad persons as well as with God-mad persons. His divine power and love are working the greatest miracle of trans­forming them. He brings their souls from darkness to light and from misery to a happy life of spiritual enlightenment. 
In our tour through India I had the opportunity to see the greatest saints of India well-known in their respective places, and I found that in Baba they recognized God, the Beloved, and that they followed him to receive his grace. Lord himself, he gave them the Grace of God, for they followed the voice of the heart, which is love. In America I had my own glimpses of Shri Krishna and Jesus Christ in my contact with him. Shri Maher Baba is the greatest Master of this  

age, and he comes to helphumanity spiritually for the sake of Love and Truth." 
The third speaker was Princess Norina Matchabelli. She said: "I met the Master in 1931 when he first came to New York. Since that time I have been his disciple. To be the disciple of a Perfect Master one has to resign in mind, body and spirit. The nature of the work of Shri Meher Baba has been made clear to us byhimself when he says: 'I have come not to teach but to awaken.' Shri Meher Baba is the awakener of the Infinite Life in us. He has not come to give to the world a new intellectual knowledge of Truth, but to enable man to experience the Truth directly in Life Infinite. * 
He brings to us the new dispensation which will help man to fulfil the Divine Theme which in him is realized in the form of the paramount state of God-man. He has not come merely to make man different but to draw him back to the Divine Source. He teaches to love in life even those whom we do not like; and this is the pure realization of love infinite. 

The transmutation of our consciousness which he will effect will create the New Man who will bring into existence a better world. This implies true faith which does not consist in beliefs concerning external rituals and ceremonies but is the pure knowing state arising from our experience of Life Real. The love inspired by his example will help us to have a life of happiness and liberation in which man is free from prejudices and is unattached to life and its play through the opposites. The new citizen of the world will be in the world but not of the world. THE SPIRITUALACADEMY This academy will prepare men who will authoritatively ask the world to be selfless and loving. They will use intellectual understanding as their medium for secular, social and international harmony.

This section will prepare real mystics of the practical type. These mystics will inspireothers to have a life in which there will be completedetachment side by side with intense creative action. They 
* antpracticilifa(humanfinitindividual. 

will also help to feel divinity  It is meant to be the training  
in every phase of life.  ground for a group of selfless  
THE ABODE OF THE SAINTS  workers who will learn how to  
This section will consist of  render real and effective  
saints who will bestow true  service. The experience gath­ 
knowledge on souls who are  ered through this department  
ignorant. They will teach  will be capable of universal  
through the medium of experi­ application.  
ence that the only real  All these six departments  
existence is God and that all  will be under the direct super- 
else is illusion.  vision of Shri Meher Baba.  
THE MAD (MAST)  The foundation stone of this  
INSTITUTE  unique institution shall be laid  
This department will be de­ by Shri Meher Baba at Mandla  
voted to the care of such God- in the near future."  
intoxicated souls as have lost  The next speaker was Mr,  
their balance while crossing  B.N. Dube, Retired Tahsildar.  
the inner planes. These souls  He said that after he met Baba  
will be given further spiritual  he was very much drawn to  
push or brought back to  him and that he found in him  
normality according to the re- the best example of love and  
quirements of the Universal  service.  
Plan behind the working of the  All these speeches were  
Universal Ashram.  followed by the presidential  
THE SOLITARY QUARTERS  speech of Rao Saheb Kekre  
FOR MEDITATION  who summed up in Hindi all  
Provision shall be made for  the previous speeches and said  
those who will most benefit  that by his personal contact he  
through meditation with suit- is convinced that Shri Meher  
able quarters and such  Baba is the very image of love,  
instructions as are necessary  and that he is one of those  
in particular cases.  Satpurushas who have them- 
THE RESTING PLACE FOR  selves attained the supreme  
THE AFFLICTED  peace and who continue to  
This section will devote  move about from place to  
attention to the removal of  place for the good of humanity.  
suffering and ailment in all  
its forms.  
c  
