








Meher	Baba on
The Sanctification of Married  Life

MOST persons enter into married life as a matter of course; but marriage will turn into a help or a hindrance according to the manner in which it is handled. There  is
no doubt that some of the immense spiritual possibilities are accessible through a married life, but all this depends upon having  the  right  attitude. From
the spiritual point of view, married life will be a success only if it is thoroughly determined by the vision of Truth. It cannot offer much if it is based upon nothing more than the limited motives of mere sex, or if it is inspired by considerations which usually obtain in the partnership of 'business'. It has to be taken as a real spiritual enterprise which is intended to discover what life can be at its best. When the two partners together launch upon the spiritual adventure of exploring the higher possibilities of the Spirit they cannot at the outset limit their experiment by any nice calculations concerning the nature and the amount of individual gain.
 

Married life almost always makes upon both the partners many demands of mutual adjustment and understanding and creates many problems which     were
originally beyond their expectation; and though this might in a sense be true	of	life	in	general	it	is particularly true of married life. In married life, two souls get   linked
with each other in many ways with the result that they are called upon to tackle the whole complex problem of personality rather than any simple problem created by some isolated desire. This is exactly the point in respect of  which married life is utterly different from promiscuous sex-partnership. Promiscuous sex-partnership attempts to separate the problem of sex from other needs of the developing personality and seeks to solve it in isolation from them; and though this kind of solution might seem    to be easy it turns out to be very superficial  and  has  further the disadvantage of side-tracking the aspirant from attempting the real solution.
The relative values of the various sides of the limited personality can be best appreciated when they get intertwined and appear in varied setting and perspective.
It is difficult to discriminate between them if they appear fitfully in a disconnected series. In married life there is ample room for varied experience with the result that the different tendencies which are latent in the mind begin
to  get  organised  around  the  crystallised  scheme  of  married life. And this organisation of varied  purposes  not only provides an unlimited field for discrimination between  the higher and lower values but also creates between them a necessary tension which requires and calls forth effective and intelligent sublimation.
In one sense, married life may be looked upon as the intensification of most human problems; and as such it becomes the rallying ground for the forces of bondage as well as
 

for the forces of freedom, the factors of ignorance as well as the factors of light. As the married  life  of  ordinary  persons     is     determined     by     mixed     motives     and
considerations, it inevitably invites an uncompromising opposition between the higher and the lower self of man; and such opposition is necessary  for
the wearing out of the lower part and the dawning of the true divine self. Married life develops so many points of contact between the two souls that severance of all connection means the unsettlement and derangement of practically the whole tenor of life; and since this difficulty of getting away from each other invites and precipitates inner readjustment, it is really a disguised opportunity for the souls to establish a real and a lasting understanding which can cope with the most complex and delicate situations.
The spiritual value of married life is directly relative to the nature of the preponderating factors which determine its daily happenings. If it is based upon shallow
considerations it can deteriorate into a partnership in selfishness as against the rest of the world; but if it is inspired by lofty idealism it can be raised to a fellowship which
not only requires and calls forth increasingly greater sacrifices for each other but actually becomes a medium through which the two souls can offer their united love and service to the whole family of humanity. When married life is thus brought into direct line with the Divine Plan for the evolution of the individual it becomes a pure blessing to   the children which are the fruit of that marriage, for they  get the advantage of imbibing spiritual atmosphere from  the very beginning of their earthly  career.
Though the children are thus the benefactors from the married life of the parents, the married life of the parents is in its turn enriched by the presence of the children.
 

Children give to the parents an opportunity for expressing and developing a real and spontaneous love in which sacrifice becomes easy and delightful and    the
part played by children in the life of the parents is of tremendous importance for the spiritual advan- cement of parents themselves. It therefore     follows     that    when
children make their appearance in married life they ought to be whole-heartedly welcome to the parents.
In view of the claims which children have on married lives the present Birth Control movement deserves careful attention and critical examination.   The
question       must       not     be
considered from the point of view   of  any   one   special or
limited interest but from the point of view of the ultimate well-being   of   the  individual
and society. The right opinion in this respect as in all respects, must above everything be based upon spiritual considerations. The attitude which most persons have towards the Birth Control movement is oscillating and confused because it contains a queer admixture of good and bad elements. While the Birth Control movement is right in its aim of securing the regulation of population, it is disastrously unfortunate in the choice of its means. There can be no doubt that the regulation of children is often desirable for personal and social reasons. Uncontrolled breeding intensifies the struggle for existence and may bring about a social order where ruthless competition becomes inevitable. Apart from creating for parents a responsibility which they cannot adequately discharge, it becomes an indirect and contributory cause of crimes, war and poverty. But though the humane and rational considerations demand and justify all serious attempts to regulate the birth of children the use of physical means for securing this purpose remains fundamentally indefensible and unjustifiable.
The purely physical means which are generally advocated by the supporters of the Birth Control movement are most objectionable from the spiritual point of view. Although the
 

physical means of Birth Control are advocated on humanitarian grounds they are almost always used by the generality of the people for serving their own  selfish
ends and for avoiding the responsibility of bearing and bringing up children. And since the physical consequences of yielding to lust can be so successfully avoided through the use   of   these   means   those who
have not begun to be awake to the higher values have no incentive to be moderate in the gratification of passion. They thus become victims to excessive indulgence and bring about their own physical, moral and spiritual ruin, by neglecting mental control and becoming a slave to the animal passion.
The easy use of the physical means obscures the spiritual side of the question and is far from being contributory to the awakening of man to his real  dignity
and freedom as a spiritual being. Thoughtless and uncontrolled indulgence must inevitably lead to reaction and spiritual bondage.
For spiritual aspirants in particular and also for all human beings (because they are all potentially spiritual aspirants) it is extremely inadvisable to rely upon physical means for the regulation of children. For the regulation of children they must rely upon nothing but mental control. Mental control secures the humanitarian purposes which inspire the Birth Control movement and keeps clear of the spiritual disasters entailed by the use of physical means; and it is not only useful for regulating the number of children but is also indispensable for restoring to man his divine dignity and spiritual well-being. Only through the wise exercise of mental control is it possible for man to rise from passion to peace, from bondage to freedom and from animality to purity. In the minds of thoughtful persons the much ignored spiritual side of this question must assume the importance which it deserves.
Since woman has to undertake the troubles and the responsibility of bearing and rearing children she may seem to
 

be affected by any possible failure in mental  control more seriously than man; but in fact it does not mean any
real unfairness to woman. It is true that woman has to undertake the troubles and the respon- sibility  of  bearing,  and  rearing
children, but she has also the compensating joy of feeding and fondling them. Thus motherhood is much greater than the joy of fatherhood. Further the man also must face and shoulder the economic and educational responsibility towards the children. In a properly  adjusted marriage there need not be any injustice in the distribution of parental responsibility which should be shared by man as well as woman. If the father as well as the mother are truly conscious of their mutual responsibility inconsiderateness will give place to active and co-operative endeavour to attain full mental control; and in the event of there being any failure in mental control they would cheerfully and willingly discharge the joint responsibility of parenthood.
If a person is not prepared to undertake the responsibility of children there is only one course which is left for him. He must remain a celibate and practise
strict mental control. For, though such mental control is extremely difficult to attain it is not impossible. From the purely spiritual point of view strict celibacy is best; but since
it is so difficult few can practise it. And for those who cannot practise it the next best course is to marry rather than fall a prey to promiscuity. Within married life one can learn to control animal passion. But it is bound to be a gradual process and in cases of failure in practising control parents must allow nature to take its own course rather than interfere with it through artificial means. They must cheerfully welcome the consequences and be prepared to shoulder the responsibility for the upbringing of children.
From the spiritual point of view, Birth Control must essentially be effected through mental control and nothing
 

else. And physical means are under no circumstances advisable even when a person seeks to use them merely as a
provisional and a second aid without intending to ignore the ideal of developing mental control. While using the physical means he can never  arrive  at  real  mental control
though he might want it in right earnest; on the contrary he becomes addicted to the use of physical means and even begins to justify them. To explain it still more clearly, what happens in the use of physical means is that while one thinks that he is using them merely as a preliminary step before mental control is fully developed, he actually gets addicted to their use and becomes a slave to that habit. And though he may for some time remain under the delusion that he is trying to develop mental control (side by side with the use of physical means) he is actually losing it gradually. In short, mental power is necessarily undermined by reliance on the physical means. Thus the use of physical means is detrimental to the development of self-control and is positively disastrous for spiritual advancement; it is therefore under no condition advisable even for the best of motives.
In the beginning of married life the partners are drawn to each other by lust as well as love. But they can with  conscious  and  deliberate  co-operation   gradually
lessen the element of lust and increase the element of love. Through this process of sublimation lust ultimately gives
place to deep love. By the mutual sharing of joys and sorrows the partners march on from one spiritual triumph to another spiritual triumph, from deep love to ever deeper love, till the possessive and jealous love of the initial period is entirely replaced by a self-giving and expansive love. In fact, through the intelligent handling of marriage a person may traverse so much of the spiritual Path that it needs only a touch by the Master to raise him into the sanctuary of eternal life.
