I have not come to bring another ideal of Truth but to give a real impulse in the realm of ' I ' which is yet unawakened. This scient Being that is in you and in a few of my disciples consciously co­operating with me, is to be held as a deep unfathomable fact that has come into existence because as human being you have evolved to a state of scient existence within. This mystical state has no more, no less a value for the external manifes­tation of you as human being that is more conscious of the Divine ' I ', than it is a more or less important realized show that in this age has to be agent in the human being to lift, to upset, to stir, to put right and to realize the Order which is impulse of realization reaction, new aspira­tion, Divine Imperative Longing. These factors of life in the Spirit have to be stirred in more than one way in this human creation while I am here in the form of a human Being. Now when I say this it has merely to show how it is important that you as a disciple of mine try to consciously realize the Intuition Expansion, and at the same time do the real intellectual effort to co­operate. These two ways of co­operation are the exact ways which I want the human mind to co­operate when I shall set in motion the Divine Power of the Word. 
This time is not far. It is not far that I shall make it clear through the Inner Cirlce that the mind within and the mind without both, are mind in the universal sense and both are in the division of intellect and universal mind, that which I mean by head and heart. These two forms of living within the realm of the human limited mind as the intellect and of the divine limitless and indivisible yet unrealized realm 

of the human as Being as Spirit as Self, as One as I or as the Divine Existence—has to come to profound joining co-operation. When I say that it is time that man and the Divine Being come to One Only State of Life that is unself­conscious in the Intuition, unself­conscious in the intellect, unself­conscious within, in the realm of Being—I make it to be when the time is due, the union of the ' I ' and the other ' I ' or the human ' I ' and the Divine Existence. All this now is too premature for the world to see; that is why I am not manifesting more than which is Divine. This what I here say may be used to explain at large the real way I am doing the upheaval in the mind of this human creation at the stage in which it is now. 
These few words that I have stated here, I wish to have really and truly used and made clear in all who search for me as a Guide. The play of opposites which the human being is never able to understand unless he has over­come his limited ' I ' can in no way be realized; this means what I have been telling you in my own mystical language in many of  my talks in previous messages. This mind that we come to realize is merely a mode to understand that which we have to realize. No one is able to realize this mind that is in Use of the Divine Pure Element. No one is able to fill the heart with Divine Being Essence. No one is able to form within the ' I ', the Other ' I ' that is real, that is good, that is unselfish—without My coming into existence and bringing to this ' I ' that is limited and unconscious—the experience of its Divine Existence. Such facts as to be identified with my Divine ' I ' are rare. 
What I meant in saying I have not come to bring any new form of religion or external form of thought about God and the theme of Self in realization, is that it is so, as in this One as the I as the portion indivisible as the individual ' I '—is God the Divine Existence. It has to be a joined order of realized existence in Self and in ' I ' as the human creature. 
Nothing can be of greater use than to see me work with the God-intoxicated men. These men have had the deep profound experiences of Truth in its Light State which is identification of the ' I ' as the portion with the Divine ' I ' Being in it immersed and self-conscious of its act of Being, its radiant realization Show is so pure, so enchanting, so unfathomably intoxicating that these men have no way out of it. They must come out of it in order to be identified with what is more than themselves as the Portion Divine, as the 'I ' indivisible, real, unselfish. They must become One with the One-All-I and that is God. That is Truth. That is being identified with the Supreme realized Show that is, whatever is, Oneness of Existence. 

Here I leave it to men to imagine what it is to be unself­conscious in the head and realized within in the realm of Pure Existence which is Light Radiance of Being, knowing that this is One-All-I in which they have no separate existence, of which they know no divisionary thought, of which they have no real conception as idea—but in which they have the Truth-form of Being. This must make some impression to the ordinary individual mind that has real longing for some realization of what is yet the Mystery of Divine Existence. Whatever this will do in them who see me work with these God-intoxicated men, is far more than you or anyone can understand! I am in them the Divine Pure Being that creates Good, that creates through these pure worthy selfless unconscious creatures a Radiation of Good that works into the Manyness of ' I '. All around these human creatures that have no sense of whatever is the external I-Life, is radiant of Good. What this human form can give to the world is unfathomable, good, real, pure, expansion of the life that is in them realized. No one has ever seen how these creatures show the evidence of being in themselves the Light that is radiant Good, Pure Existence which is real divine. 
Remember to tell everyone who comes near the small House that in that house is God functioning as human Being, making them realize deep and pure that which they should win in wanting to realize the same as these God-intoxicated creatures have been winning throughout lives of self-sacrifice and untold self­

denial, self-chastisement. Self-conscious in them—' I ', as the human working God, do the wonder of realization in everyone who is inclined to come to see me for that pure, real purpose to be in themselves free of the limitations of the mind and free of the bindings of their individual I; and unself­reactive within in that realm that is unfathomable mystery to all who have not conscious realized what is the goal of this life. 
Give me one second of your existence and I will return it to you free of these quests and bindings. Give me one second of your whole individual existence and I come to you and free you from that which is unself-conscious, unreal, uncrea­tive in that other side of you which is real, which is Divine. Give me one second of your whole existence and I will give you more of that which I have to give and which I am giving unendingly in every ordinary and extraordinary way of me as a human selfless servant of mankind—as Love. Give me you as human creation whether good or bad, whether real or false and I will make you One with that which is Me. I am here not to make men believe that God is the unrealized state impersonal in existence which has to be realized impersonal in Being, but to make man know that God is right in them, right there where they are good and bad, where they have no way out of being that what they have to be. When I say this it is that I have to make it clear in a very simple language to all who will read this. What I have been saying in the un­fathomable mystical language till now through you is more or less the same as meaning. The unfathom­able mystical language has this advantage over the intellectual philosophical way of speaking that it is straight from the supreme source from where it is creative, unrealized, pure expansion of Conscious Existence. It has the advantage of deep unself-reactive real order within in Being. Apparently it is unfathomable and unintelligible, but it is far more than Intelligence Realization. It is Pure Being Realization. In this realm of knowing, the thought has the creation power of being clear, pure, unself-reactive in the head, but real Expansion 

in Being. Whatever is the meaning, it is radiation of its pure source of Existence. No one needs to understand my mystical language but everyone must read it with reverence, and realize that in that realm of ' I ' Invisible—is I, the One who is doing this expansion in conscious order, who has to bring to the surface the radiant order of this creation show unfathomable. 
No one needs to criticise my mystical way of Being, as in it I have the Order to function and to do and to realize that which is the Being. So let it be told to all who have read and not understood my mystical message that I am in it the pure Order. This is sufficient as in this I give everyone the right direction how to make more Use of these mystical messages. When I here have spoken the ordinary philosophy of life, unself-reactive in the head as the human creation, I have done it to give you the certitude of me being within the realized show that is in you seeing, knowing and feeling. In this you have to earn the Truth which is the exact opposite of its own form of realizing through seeing, knowing and feeling. When I here say this, it is because I know that you are ready to give in and to alive die for the Truth. To alive die means not to think, not to react, not to experience and not to self-realize, 
but to see in me One only pure Wonder and that is to identify yourself within in my Wonder-I and that is you as pure Being. 
Come to me all whenever necessary and I will lead you out of the puzzle of doubts and of mis­interpretations of what is real. I have nothing to say but to bless all those who have come to see me and those who have come to donate me their lives. To give up the life is one way to come to me. To give up the Being is the other way to come to come to me and to be identified with me. So let it all grow still quiet and do not worry. I shall not miss to real and true give the help when it is called for. When men come to me asking me to give enlightenment on this quest through which they have to grow and that is to realize their own Self and to be their own Self as the Portion Divine of me, I have seen that those have been shown through 

their own martyrdom in self-realization to come to a new turning point. This turning point is to see me and no more. Let this be the Turning Day out of which they will arise free and sure and strong, and unselfish in every way. 
With this I close the day's work and give all my benediction.
