
Th e m o s t o ut s t a nd i ng moment in my life was  the me e t i n g w i t h S h r i Me h e r Baba.
It wa s by c h a n c e , s o i t seemed at the time,  that  I fir s t h e a r d o f S h r i B a b a through a friend of  Madame B.. in Paris. Never having been what some would call spiritually-­‐minded and  having ha d n l e a ni ng s t o w a r ds "isms" of any kind, the phrase of Shri Baba, "I have come not to teach but to awaken", struck something responsive in my heart. It was like a tiny seed  dropped by the wayside. Whether it had fallen on fertile soil or not was yet to be seen.
Having heard that Shri Baba would be in London in  the fall of 1933, I decided to go there, hoping to have the privilege of meeting Him, firmly believing that, i it were the time for me to meet Him, I would.
On  arrival  difficulties  arose,
but   these  were  shortly   over-­‐
 
come and an interview granted.
spent several restless hours, suddenly	becoming		rather nervous at the thought of meeting someone to know so little about, and that yet in some strange way seemed drawn to. The moment came, I stepped into the room, and everything  around faded. All I saw was one whose beauty of expression defied description and who looked at me with much gentleness and kindness that it imprinted itself indelibly in my memory. I knew then that were I never to see Shri Baba again, I had	received	something		that would	remain		with	me	for
always.
Nine months elapsed before seeing Shri Baba again. During that time I thought of Him, especially when I put  my  pencil to paper, as He had told me that He would help me with my painting and drawing. It was indeed so, for I did many things that had never done before, and all because His guiding influence was there.
Shri Baba returned to the
 


West in the spring of 1934. I was with Him for ten days in Zurich. It was there that I really began to realize what it was to come in contact with a Perfect Master. A slow process of breaking up started to take place in my being. As when spring comes and the iceberg shifts and slow1y  starts to melt and give way, so the barrier that I had built within myself began to disappear, and a new understanding came and with it a great love. The more I was with Shri Baba, the more I knew that my one object in life was henceforth to follow Him and to serve Him to the best of my ability.
The last two years I have  spent in close contact with Shri Baba, both in the West and here. Only those who have been close  to the Master can realize how intense  life it is and how hard  and strict the discipline can be.
The ways of a Perfect  Master were sometimes very difficult to understand, but when one has complete faith and love one just needs to obey, for the Master takes care of everything. Many times hav seen things g wrong  and     all     because     Shri    Baba
having told someone to do a certain thing, he or she shifted  the duty on to someone else  or did not carry out the Master's instructions to the letter.
Being with Shri Baba seems to lend colour to everyone and everything that surrounds Him. All types are His followers, and some who under ordinary circumstances one would have nothing in common with, yet because of their united love to Him, one sees with different eyes. One's whole outlook on everything is seen through Him. One becomes happier. Before it seemed one just existed.
Many times I have been asked  i I did not feel strange with Shri Baba as He does not speak. It is to my heart and soul that He speaks, and for that there is no need of  the tongue.
The love one has for Shri Baba overcomes all obstacles, and to give up all for love of the Master  is no hardship, for one gives up nothing and gains all. Baba is the essence of Love, and through His Love one becomes purified.
When one comes to Baba  one's life becomes his to do
with point made

as he wishes, and at that difficulties  arise.  One  is  to   consciously   recognise
one accepts, knowing time will reveal the reasons of the Master's devious ways.
 
one's  faults  and  failings,  so  that	The Love of the Master   needs
 
little
 
by	little	they	can	be
 
no   miracles   to   keep   its     faith
 
annihilated. One must put one's heart into whatever one is doing, whether it be important, trivial or menial, and above all learn to become detached from its results.
Many times one's faith is put to the test, for the Master will do things which might be contrary to one's way of doing. No explanations are given, and
 
whole and unswerving.
The express image of the word 'Divine' art Thou!
The mirror of all regal loveli-­‐ ness  art Thou!
With Thee in this world naught of itself exists ;
Search where we will, we surely find all, all is Thou!"
—HAFIZ.
