



Interview* 


BY C. B. PURDOM (LONDON) (Author of "The Perfect Master)

 Shri Meher Baba has been silent for the past fifteen years. The fact that he does not speak is significant for two reasons. The first reason is that his silence is symbolical. Baba has not come, as he says, to teach people, because all the teaching is already in existence. He has come to awaken people. Therefore, it is not necessary to speak. There is no more to be said. It is to be done. The second reason is, that by not speaking, he does not disperse in the forms of words that essential element of the human personalityóthe libido: the power of life, that power by which we live. 

    Life is expressed in all sorts of ways. In the growth of our bodies, in action, in thought, and also in words. We exhaust ourselves in talking. If you don't talk, you store up vital and soul energy. This is a very difficult thing to do. Baba uses this energy for his work on spiritual planes. 

To come to what has to be done, concretely, it is, you have to do something to the very next person. It is not some tremendous plan to be thought out and exe≠cuted, but very simple thing to a simple person. Do always the very first thing to the next person, and keep on doing it and the world would be transformed. This is not a new idea, but as old as human wisdom. That is putting it very simply; but constructively, the thing that has to be done is to realize one's self, to be yourself exactly as you are. That is the last thing we dare to be; we are all sorts of beings that we imagine ourselves to be, or that wish others to think we are; but our real selvesówe dare not be our≠selves. The meaning of it is that we should do precisely what we like, which is to be what Baba wants us to be. But this is not easy, though we wish for nothing better. When you realize that this is the meaning of lifeóthat you should do as you 



*Notes of a talk given to a group in London. 

 

likeóyou usually make this terrible discovery (and here life begins for many) that when you come to face the possibility that you can do just as you like, you discover that there is nothing you want to do. So you do nothing; and this everybody discovers. 

The "Self" which Baba has come to awaken is that hidden Self, the Self which we don't realize, which lies dormant, because this little "I"-self is active which we call ourselves. 

    All the things we do, the whole of our existence, is a sort of panorama. It is our own play which we compose, produce and perform in. Our life in the terms of the world is really no more than a play. When we begin to look at our own selves so, we begin to live. Nothing that hap≠pens in the life of senses has any more reality than a play. We have to observe ourselves as spectators at a play, and not until then do we live according to the spirit and in accordance with Baba's sayings. 

Baba's method is simple, so simple that people often don't understand it. When people come to Baba he says very little. He will say that he likes you, or that he loves you, or that he is with you; and he always says: "Don't worry." He never asks any questions, and if you say nothing to him no more is said. It does not go beyond that. I know myself that when I have had questions on my mind, I have never asked themóI have found that it is not necessary. As soon as you sit down with him you realize it is not necessary. If you ask him what you should doóand I have done soóhe will answer your question, and he expects you to carry out what he says. Once I said, "Tell me something to do," and he gave me something very simple to do. Twelve months after he said: "Did I tell you to do something when I saw you last ?" I said, "Yes, but it is peculiar that I frequently forgot to do it." Baba frowned and said: "You must do it." When he tells you to do some≠thing, you must do it, especially if you ask him. It is much better not to ask him. It is very dangerous to ask him for instruction and not to follow it. In fact, it is very dangerous to meet one like Baba unless you are prepared to open yourself up to him. 




The effect he has is to drive you still further in the direction of false life, because until we are living according to the spirit, we live in the flesh. To meet Baba is to increase the pace of your life in one direction or the otheróit may be to destruction, because the meaning of the world is death, so that Baba is a very dangerous person, even to know about, and certainly to be in contact with. However meaningless may seem what he says to you, you must do it. And so, unless you are pre≠pared to do what he says, I advise you not to ask him anything. He says "don't worry" always, to everyone. If we could stop worrying, our lives would be entirely different. The difficulty is 

'' 

that we dont trust. We haven t confidence, we don 't believe, and all our troubles come from that. 

    Another question that is often discussed is miracles and mira≠culous events. Of course, Indians write about numerous things that he has done or is supposed to have done. It is not that miracles don't happen, but that they don 't matter. Miracles happen in the world of mechanics. Miracles, therefore, from a spiritual point of view, signify nothing whatever, and if I saw a series of miraculous things in connection with Baba, I should feel immediately that there was something wrong. A miracle is a miracle from the standpoint of the worldóand that does not matter. There are miracles in the spiritual world. Ah! that is a different matter. The miracle in the spiritual world is to be yourself, and that is the greatest miracleóto be yourself, and only those people who get above the earthóabove the terms of the worldóonly those people exper≠ience this. So the fact that Baba does no miracles in the physical sense is the greatest possible proof of his spiritual being. What he does in secret is his own affair. It is dangerous to become his disciple, and it is dangerous to leave him. Yet when you have become a disciple, he will do everything to make you leave him. He will hold you, but he will throw you off, if you will let him. Baba wants you to discard him, if you can. He will do everything to make it hard for you to stay. If you can be thrown off, you will be thrown off. So, if you read of people who once were disciples and are not now, that is inevi≠table. Spirit is not inactivity and letting things remain as they are. The essence of Spirit is intense activity. It is matter that is not active. When you come into con≠tact with Baba, you are coming into contact with tremendous activity. Part of that activity is to force everything away from itself. But Baba's effort to throw the disciple off is not merely as a test of his value, it is actually for his supreme good. There is a moment of ripeness. When you are thrown off, in the ripe moment you stand on the same level as he stands. The whole object of Baba is that you should stand on the same level as he, possessing the same activity, the same spiritual consciousness, and it is at that moment that the final throw-off takes place. 



    Otherwise you are thrown off but come back again, and Baba throws you off again and again. But once you become a disciple of Baba 's, you must not allow anything to throw you off; however confusing things may become, you must hold on tight. Not until you are ripe will you be thrown off with gladness. Your heart pulsates with joy and you  get more and more insight. But you will know the ripe moment. 

    Finally let me say this, "What have I to do?" Acting on his instruction "don't worry", "I am with you", I suggest this: hope for the best, the very best that we can do, that we can think of in our best moments, that we can hope for. We shall get it, for we already have it. In other words, there is not anything in your most inspired moments which you have not got. All your desires and finest feelings are realized. That is the meaning of Baba. 

    We have to wake up so that, instead of finding that we are wretched characters, we discover that we are divine spirits, having all things, and that, instead of going about grumbling, we should be rejoicing always, for everything is ours. 

    That is what I understand the meaning of Baba to be, his announcement of the spiritual life, not something remote but something immediate, something we have at once, without waiting. This is so good, that it cannot be true; but the truth is that the very best is true. 
