

Saint	Janabai
BY  MRS.  INDUMATI  DESHMUKH,  M.A., B.T.

 
TIME proves the greatness of man. It is often said that no memorial of a  great person should be erected till ten years after his death. After the period  is elapsed if people still feel like  having his memorial, then only it is proved that he was really a great man and the memorial may be erected. Janabai has more than passed this test of greatness with full credit, and to-day even after 600 years, we not only have her name, but even her poetry sung even by village people. Her poetry touches the hearts of the readers and it makes a permanent room for her in their hearts. She was great not only as  a devotee, but also as a poet.
On the banks of the river    Godavari
there is a village
 
named Gangathad. There lived a person named Dama who was a shudra (belonging to menial class) by caste. He had a wife named Karund. Both of them were very much devoted to the Lord, but were feeling miserable for want of a child. Every year they used  to go to Pandharpur on foot. Once when they had been there, they prayed the Lord for a son. Dama was nearly  60 years old at that time. While he was at Pandharpur, he saw the Lord in his dream saying that he would not get a son, but would get a daughter who would be a great devotee of the Lord and would be famous all over India. But as she was to come in contact with Namdev, one of the greatest devotees of the time, she should be handed over to
 

 
Namdev's father. Dama was extremely glad and told about the dream to his wife, and soon after they found that the dream turned out to be true.
It is rather unfortunate that the exact date of Janabai's birth is not known. But because of her contemporaries we can find out the time when she lived. She lived in the thirteenth century along	with	the	Perfect	Master DÒyandev and other realized persons like Namdcv, Sopandev, Muktabai, etc. Dama took Janabai to Damashettió Namdev's fatherówhen she was seven years old. All the members of his family were very much devoted to the Lord and this had a great influence upon her mind. Janabai came as a servant to the family. Her own caste was considered as lower to that of the family, but because of her sweet nature and her ardent devotion to the Lord she was treated as one of the members    of
the family.
ln the region  of  spirituality,  the heart is always more valuable and important than the head or the intellect. One may not be able to understand the high principles of philosophy or
 
religion or even of the way how the Lord should be approached, still if he loves God, if his heart is full of devotion and love for Him, salvation and realization are his. But on the other hand, even if he possesses a very high kind of intellect, and if his heart is dry and devoid of devotion and love for God, he cannot reach Him nor will he be able to get real satisfaction. Generally in case of men, the intellect is more developed mostly because of the education they receive; but in case of women we see that they work more with their hearts than with their heads, and many a time they realize even earlier than men without any hard efforts like meditation or tapa. We see the truth of the above statement even in case of Janabai. She was only a maid servant of Namdev. She herself called her dasi (maid-servant) of Namdev even in her poetry. But her state of consciousness was as high as that of  her Master's.
Almost all the famous contemporary saints of Janabai have noted their experiences in poetry. It is said that all of them had their separate writers and Pandurang (the
 

 
Lord) Himself is said to have written Janabai's abhangas (poems). This shows how advanced she was in the religious sphere. She used to compose or sing them and He noted them down. Janabai's poetry is simple, sweet and natural. There is no mysticism in her poetry, but it is full of love which is at once felt by the reader.
Many stories are told about her lower love for the Lord. It is said that once when all the members of Namdev's family were sleeping in their little hut, all of a sudden its roof was thrown away by a great storm. The Lord sent his sudarshan chakra (missile) for their help and in a short time He Himself repaired the roof. Nobody, but Janabai knew this and feeling that He must have been tired after all the work He had done, she began to massage his back and feet, etc. The Lord was so much pleased at the sweet and loving devotion of Janabai, that He then used to help her even in her domestic work.
One day, it is said that He had come to help Janabai in her work. It was in the very early hours of the morning when nobody had got up
 
from his bed. Later, when the Lord returned to His temple in hurry, He forgot His upper garment and an ornament at her place. The persons (who used to worship the Image of the Lord) found this out and after enquiry, they found that the things were with Janabai. She was arrested and was sentenced to death. But to the surprise of all, as soon as she sang the last prayers, the thing with which she was to be killed, melted into water. This occasion made others realize her spiritual greatness. Being	contemporary	of	saints, Janabai had opportunity of living with Muktabai, DÒyandev's sister, for a long time. They lived together and also travelled together a great deal. There is a reference to one place in Muktabai's life, that, once while they were enjoying a swing, both of them composed abhangas (poems)   singing   them   one  after
another.
The language of Muktabai's poetry is very high as compared to that of Janabai's. The theme is also highly mystic as well as philosophical. But the theme of Janabai's poetry is very simple. At one place she says :
 

 
ìWhere is the stick of the Blind? (comparing herself to a blind man and in the next line, to a young one of a deer). O deer-mother, in what forest art thou? I, your dumb young one, have lost the way and am waiting for you. What shall I do and how long shall I live without you? I am now dying. Mother, come running immediately."
Janabai requests the saints, "Kindly bring my mother to me. Let me meet her." At one place, she describes Namdev's kirtan (where generally a devotee stands up and describes the Lord, and Namdev was very famous for doing this in an enchanting way. His kirtan used to attract a great number of people). Kirtan. means singing in praise of God. It is not possible to describe the greatness
 
of kirtan. It is greater even than Tapas or meditations, or visits to sacred places, and Namdev's kirtan is so enchanting that things from heaven have come for that. Janabai says, "there are witnesses for this. How shall I describe it?î
There were many saints who were Perfect Masters living at the time of Janabai. She refers to some of them with great respect and devotion. But none of these was her Master. It is said that Narada, one of the greatest sages of Gods who lived in heaven, was her Master. He is said to be ever-living and he visited Janabai in person.
It is not known how long Janabai lived, but there is a reference of her death in some old book in the fourth month of the Indian year in Shake 1272.
 

