
Now-a-days in this critical era, there are so many wrong aspects of the right thing that we naturally get puzzled, and mix the right with the wrong. India is very fortunate, as we know, in being a spiritual land with a strong spiritual atmos­phere. It contains innumerable “saints”, but it is very difficult to find a true saint among them. Some people have such a childish idea about saints; but it is not their fault; it is human nature to place true things among the majority of false things; still if we search for a true saint, we are sure to be satisfied. 
Here I present to you the true fact of my own self and my Perfect Master. Very often our physical pains and sufferings bring good luck, and sometimes the best future, if the Almighty wants to bestow His Grace upon one of His children by showering bodily pains and worldly sufferings. 
Let me tell you about my own experience. When I was a child of five years, I was infected with a terrible skin disease. Doctors were consulted and remedies used, but gradually it went on spreading all over my body. Famous specialists of skin diseases (incuding Homeopathy) were interested in my disease, and took me as an experimental patient to be tested; some found the blood to be very hot, and some called it stained blood. Everyone of them tried various kinds of medicines, soaps, powders and injections. They tried their best, but all in vain. The disease now reached to such an extent that none could look at me without tears. I could not wear clothes or shoes any more, because there were boils every-where, even the knuckles and spaces between my fingers were not left clear without it. I was sent to one of the famous hospitals in Bombay where they tried the same things and applied coal tar as the last remedy, but all their scientific labours proved worthless. In this way years passed and I entered my teens. One day, all of a sudden, certain words of a specialist came to my mind: "I have done all I can for my little patient, and still how she suffers. I regret that I must inform you that her disease is incurable. Poor crea­ture! She will have to suffer till the end of her life. I have done the best of my best." This he spoke years ago to my family. Remem­bering these words I changed my mood. I declared to my family, "Doctors are hypocrites! Medi­cines are a farce! I definitely have made up my mind not to take any further medicine and not to go under any doctor's treatment." At that time my family had just come into contact with Shri Baba. They told me about Him and tried to persuade me to go to Him. I answered in anger, "Who is your Baba? Whoever He may be, I don't want to see anybody, not even your Baba!” 

After their continuous per­suading I went to see Shri Baba. I saw Him, far away, coming down the hill at Meherabad. Without any sensation I saw with my own eyes, something very bright, like many, many lights. I thought, is this day brighter than usual? Does Baba come down with some lights, or does the sun shine more than usual? Shri Baba came down and took His seat. He ordered, on His alphabetical board, (due to His keeping silence) for all to take darshana one by one. As there was a crowd, I remained outside and stared at Shri Baba with a blank mind. Something was going on in my heart, and though I tried so much to stand it, at last tears burst in my eyes. Then in turn, I went and bowed my head to Shri Baba, in our Indian way, and He embraced me as lovingly as a mother would take her child to her heart. Then Shri Meher Baba ordered me to tell the whole matter in my own words, but the force of my tears was unpreventable; so one of my family told Shri Baba about me. After hearing this, Shri Baba turned to me and said, "And, only for this you wept so much?" I nodded "no" between my sobs. I informed 

SHRI MEHER BABA AND MY PHYSICAL SUFFERING 
Shri Baba that there was something inside, and I could not help weep­ing. I added, "I pray, Baba, be kind and shower Your sweet Love and Grace upon me." Shri Baba said, "Don't worry; you will be cured permanently. I will give you some ashes; say My name and put a pinchful of it in your mouth every morning before tea.” I went home and I had the same weeping feeling for a long time, but did not have a single thought of my disease or of being cured. I did as Baba ordered me to do, and, at the end of the month, after having suffered for twelve years, I was cured. 
My happiness and that of my family knew no end. A year and a half passed. The same family member (who had accompanied me when I went before Baba) went again to see Him. When he return­ed, I asked him for news about Baba. He told me that Baba was continually in Eternal and Infinite Happiness, and, he added, "But He appears to have now a skin disease, and I have remarked that it is exactly like yours." I received a shock by hearing this. I became restless with the thought that Baba has relieved me of my pain, and now He suffers instead of me. I began to weep, and I prayed con­stantly, ''Oh Baba, I am a useless creature. Why should you suffer for me? Give the disease back to me!" And in the same year, it returned to me as before. I tried to hide it from my family, but they knew about it and took me to Baba at the first opportunity. I said that this time I wanted to see Him quite alone. I presented myself to Baba and told Him what had happened. He said, "Do you believe that I suffered for you? Let it be as it is." I told Him I believed with all my faith that there is nothing impos­sible for Him to do. 
I pleaded that as He has given me the disease again, it should continue. He said, "Neither you nor I have to suffer." After this I got well, and now no one can hardly recognize me who had seen me during my pain. At that period also it occurred that the marks on Babas skin vanished. 
From this, wise readers, what to think and what not to think about this living person­

al God, Shri Meher Baba, I leave it to you. Those who have a clear glass can see Him as He is, but poor they who have cloudy glasses and can see only what their cloudy glasses show them. May Shri 

. 
Meher Baba give us all the spiritual strength to overcome our mental weaknesses and untangle us from the snare of our own defects. 
Hail, Shri Meher Baba! 
