



Hazrat Babajan of Poona 

By Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Hazrat Babajan, in the history of spiritual Islam, is the second manifes≠tation of Divinity on earth, in the female form, after the famous Rabia of Basrah. This does not mean there have been no other spiritually enlightened women in between that period. But it is a fact that there have been none in history or within living memory who can be said to approach Hazrat Babajan of Poona in spiritual greatness. 

A tradition is current amongst Muslim Sufis of the Qalandariyah* order, that the world up to now has seen only two and a half Qalandars; by half they evidently mean Rabia of Basrah, being female. There is also a mystical explanation given for the incomplete numerical figure two and a half. They believe that the completion of three Qalandari manifestations on earth, would precipitate the end of the world.  

If there be at all any meaning in this fantastic belief, it is surely fulfilled in the manifestation of Hazrat Babajan, though not in the material sense, visualised above. Hazrat Babajan's in≠carnation synchronises with the end of a previous order of things in the spiritual evolution of the world and the beginning of the Qalandari Era (Daore-Qalandari). 

What is Qalandari Era? It will get automatically explained by the fol≠lowing parable recounted by a saint, in answer to a question by a disciple as to the difference in the spirituality of Masters like Moulana Rumi, Fari≠duddin Attar and Buali Qalandar. The Saint said, "A woman was drawing water at a well, and three travellers feeling thirsty approached her for water to drink. The first one said, 'Mother, give me water to drink.' The woman was evidently flattered by the mode 



of his address, and feeling it an act of virtue, was too pleased to help him quench his thirst. The second one accosted her thus, 'Wife of my father, feed me a little water.' The woman, with an effort, concealed her dis≠pleasure and allowed him a drink. The third traveller was downright informal, and invited the wrath of the woman by his unguarded mode of address. The Saint further added, "This explains the difference in spirituality of the Masters mentioned by you. Moulana Rumi, ap≠peals to the church of Islam for deliver≠ing the knowledge of Divinity (Taohid) clothed in parables. Fariduddin Attar, is outspoken, and his gnosis (Man) is shocking to the externelists (Able-Zahir), while Buali Qalandar is blat≠antly bold in his exposition of Divinity and naturally offends both the church and the Sufi." Here the third traveller bespeaks the Qalandari Era, the charac≠teristic feature whereof will he the universal dissemination of spiritual truths and Divine secrets, however unpalatable they may be to traditionally vested interests. In Hazrat Babajan, therefore, one finds a reasonable inter≠pretation of the legend as to three Qalandars on earth signifying the end of the world. Surely the old world of ideas and beliefs, particularly in the domain of religion, is dying, and every≠one is anxiously expectant as to what next it will be replaced by. The churches of all denominations have ceased to be the magnetic centres of human lives and the priests and pandits have come to be looked upon as fos≠silized growths still clinging to the walls thereto. The present intellectual level of man and the concomitant irreligiosity demands a different ap≠proach to spiritual knowledge than offered by the church. Spiritual truths hitherto scrupulously guarded, directly imparted to a select few and doled out to the world at large in the form of 'Do and Don'ts' can no longer be withheld from being made accessible to all. The mysticism of the few and the mystery to many, concerning Divinity, prophet-hood, saintliness, creation, evolution, time and space these days is an open book for all who care to read. The im≠mediate future 



visualizes every item of humanity, possessing intellectually the knowledge of its Divine origin, its present evolu≠tionary stage and its spiritual future. The knowledge of his glorious begin≠ning and the transcendental end of man will impel everyone to say 'I am God ', but the consciousness of crucification implied in the utterance will prevent a premature expression. This is what is meant by Daore-Oalandarióthe gar≠ment of religion turned inside out. 

    The following life-sketch of Hazrat Babajan is the most authenticated ver≠sion as yet presented to the world, although the information gleaned from different sources is meagre, since Baba≠jan herself was never communicative to anyone with regard to her life history. The facts of her early life and those relating to her spiritual career have all been confirmed by Hazrat Meher Baba, her chief disciple and spiritual Charge-man ( Khalifa ).

    Hazrat Babajan hails from Afghan≠istan (Central Asia) and was the daughter of a well-to-do Afghan of noble lineage. Her maiden name was Gul-rukh (rose-faced) and her early training was that befitting the status of an Afghan aristocrat. At a very early age she became Hafiz-e-Quran (one who learns Quran by heart), and later became conversant with Arabic, Per≠sian, Pushtoo and Urdu. From early life she developed mystical tendencies, and unlike girls of her age, she used to pass a good deal of her time in prayers, meditation and solitude.

    This mystical aspect in her asserted itself, as when coming of age, she was found to be dead-set against any idea of marriage. The parents could not under≠stand her and to them the idea of a Pathan girl remaining unmarried was extremely scandalous. Finding the situation no longer tenable and the parents bent upon forcing the issue of matrimony on her, Gul-rukh managed to escape and came to Peshawar (India) and thence to Rawalpindi. For a Pathan girl brought up under the strictest discipline of the purdah system, the escape from parental custody at the age of 18 years, was not an easy under≠taking. Surely it was her spiritual destiny that covered up all her tracks and landed her safely in India un≠scathed 



and undetected. 

At Rawalpindi, Gul-rukh lead an as≠cetic life for some years, and eventually came into contact with a Hindu Saint, who first initiated her into the Spiritual Path. After this initiation she went into seclusion in a nearby mountain outside Rawalpindi and underwent very severe Riyaz (spiritual austerities) for nearly seventeen months. Thereafter she came down to the Punjab and stayed a few months in Multan. It was in Multan, while Gul-rukh was 37 years of age, that she contacted a Muslim Saintóa Majzoob (immersed in Divinity) who put an end to her spiritual struggle by giving her God-realization. Gul-rukh once again wends her way to Rawal≠pindi, and there she is again spiritually drawn to the same Hindu Saint, res≠ponsible for her first initiation. The Saint helps her to come down from the super-conscious state of God-realiza≠tion to the normal consciousness of a personal god. In the language of Sufis, the super-conscious state of God-realization is called Mushahida and the return to normal consciousness is called Irfan. 

    Hereafter for Gul-rukh begins a long trail of journeys from one part of India to another. In one of her itineraries she visits Bombay, and after a few months stay in Bombay, goes back once again to the Punjab, and spends a good number of years at different places in Northern India. It was at this time that she happened to utter in a moment of ecstacy, words connoting her Divine state. This was treated as rank blas≠phemy by orthodoxy, who, with the connivance of the church, got her buried alive. Gul-rukh miraculously survived this ordeal, and finding the country unsafe for her she bade good bye to the Punjab and Northern India for ever. She travelled South to Bom≠bay, and in this, her second visit to the City, she took up her abode in a locality known as Choona Bhatti near Byculla. Bombay, however, was not to be graced by her presence for long, and the enviable honour of manifesting Gul≠rukh's spiritual greatness goes to Poona, situated 120 miles south-east of Bom≠bay. It was in Poona, that the Sepoys of the Baluchi Regiment which had only recently 



arrived from the North and who knew that Gul-rukh was buried and dead, had a surprise of their life to find her all alive and seated underneath a neem (margosa) tree at a place called Malcolm Tank (Char Bavadi) in Can≠tonment limits. The Baluchi Sepoys looked upon this as a great miracle, and thus feeling convinced of her spiritual greatness, gave Gul-rukh an ovation, by bowing to her reverentially. After this incident her saintly fame spread far and wide, and she came to be universally known as Hazrat Babajan. 

For some time after her entry into Poona about the year 1903, Babajan had no fixed place of abode. She was seen sitting or resting at odd places, in different parts of the City and Canton≠ment. Although shabbily dressed, there was something magnetic in her person≠ality, very unusual in a street mendicant that she looked, that no passer-by could resist giving her a second glance. She was seldom seen moving about or sitting anywhere all alone. There were always a few people loitering round eyeing her curiously or sitting with her smoking bidis (Indian cigarettes). Her bodily requirements were very few, and food she ate very sparingly at long in≠tervals. She was very fond of tea which was offered her very frequently by visitors. While walking the streets, on whomsoever her eyes fell, that person could not but halt or stand up rever≠entially until she passed by. The tea shop-wallas and fruit sellers would expectantly invite her to help herself to anything she liked; if perchance she condescended to accept anything, that was deemed a great honour and an auspicious token of good business for the day. 

An unsettled life of some years in and around Poona, sees Babajan at last settled at a spot near Char Bavadi, Mal≠colm Tank, underneath the neem (mar≠gosa) tree. At this time the locality mentioned was a picture of dirt, deso≠lation and ugliness, a breeding spot of plague and pestilence and a regular haunt of dangerous riff-raffs by night. In such surroundings full of squalor and dirt, protected merely by an apology of a shelter, improvised of gunny cloth, Babajan unconcernedly 



goes through all the inclemencies of the Indian weather and seasons, presenting a perfect embodiment of resignation and self-abnegation (Tasleem-o-Raza). Within a decade of Babajan's presence, the locality underwent a metamorphosis surpassing all expectations. What with the featural changes in buildings all around, the electrified tea-shops ringing with the clatter of cups and saucers, a concourse of people consisting of all ranks and creeds waiting for Babajan's darshana, a street bard entertaining the crowd with his music, the beggars clamouring for alms, easy-going idlers standing indiscriminately hampering vehicular traffic and the whole atmosphere heavily laden with sweet smelling incense perpetually kept burn≠ing near Babajan, presented a scene typically Eastern, leaving an indelible impression on one 's memory. 

    The Cantonment authorities became alive to the situation, and had it been possible they would unhesitatingly have had Babajan shifted to some out of the way spot. But they dared not risk a public demonstration in the matter.  

By now Babajan 's fame as a Saint had spread far and wide and 'Char Bavadi' became a place of pilgrimage for people from all over India. Backed by public opinion a few elected members of the Cantonment Board successfully prevailed upon that body to build at their expense a decent and permanent structure, in place of Babajan 's shabby shelter. When the new structure which was only a few feet away from Babajan's original seat was ready, to everyone's surprise she refused to be moved there. The awkward situation however was got over by extending the structure a little more so as to include and embrace Babajan 's original seat, as well as the neem tree. 

    Years rolled by, seasons kept rota≠ting, the locality put on a new face, the number of devotees multiplied beyond all computation, but throughout all this kaleidoscopic evolution, Hazrat Baba≠jan remained unperturbed and unaf≠fected. 

When Babajan first came to Poona people surmised her age to be not less than 90 years, and thereafter even 30 years added to her life in the City 



wrought no material changes in her personality. Short in stature, firm and agile in gait, back slightly bent with rounded shoulders, skin fair and sun-burnt, face broad and heavily wrinkled, high cheek bones, liquid blue eyes pos≠sessing great depths, head covered with a silvery crown of thick white hair hanging loose up to the shoulders, deep sonorous voice, all conspired to make her personality very unique and un≠worldly. Her attire was simple, con≠sisting of a long apron extending below the knees, a pyjama narrowed round the legs and a linen scarf thrown carelessly round the shoulders. She always went about bare-headed; the luxuriant crop of white hairónever oiled or groom-edówas for all practical purposes a head-dress in itself. 

    Numerous miracles are attributed to Hazrat Babajan, but for want of space they shall be recounted later in this Journal. However, some of her charac≠teristic habits (Khirge-adat) need mention here. Babajan slept very little, and the apparent bodily relaxation of Perfect Saints is nothing like what  human  beings enjoy as sleep. Irregular scanty meals and frequent potions of Indian tea, would surely have shattered any robust constitution, but Babajan, in spite of her age, felt no adverse effects there-from. One day she would feel out of sorts, at times even high fever, and the next day she would be her usual self without recourse to any medication. Young and old, male or female she used to address everyone as Bacha or Baba (child or baby). And if anybody accosted her as Mai (mother), she would flare up and say, "I am a man and not a woman, " thereby confirming one of the sayings of Prophet Moho-med, meaning, "Lovers of God are males; lovers of paradise are eunuchs; and lovers of the world are females. " 

Her method of healing was quite unique and entertaining. When anyone approached her for a cure, she would say, "The child is being tormented by goliyan (small round pellets), meaning thereby the effect of AntalóSans≠karasóhere wrong actions. To the amusement of those around, she would hold between her fingers, the painful or diseased part of the person concerned, and calling upon some imaginary being, she would give two or three sharp jerks to the affected part, simultaneously ordering the trouble≠some entity to quit. Surprisingly enough, this funny operation would impart instantaneous relief, and the party concerned would depart smiling and happy. 



Babajan's love and charity towards humanity was supremely Divine in expression; it could not but reclaim a most confirmed sinner and subdue the cruelest of minds. Articles of clothing and other presentations to Babajan, people would remove without her permission, and her seat being open to the road some would even dare to steal, feeling convinced she would not protest. Once a man tried to steal a costly shawl covering her body while asleep, but he found its removal rather risky, as some portion of it was held underneath her body. Babajan instinc≠tively raised herself bodily a little, thereby helping the thief to achieve the purpose. On another occasion a person from Bombay, in token of his fulfilled desire, placed two bangles of solid gold round Babajan's  wrists. At the earliest opportunity, an unknown person snatched away the bangles so very roughly that it gave her wrist a nasty cut which bled profusely. The cry of "catch the thief" was raised by people around, and a policeman on duty approached the scene. To the discomfit of every one around, Babajan ignored the real culprit, and asked the police≠man to arrest those around calling for thief. An idea can be had of her super-physical state when the act of eating was described by her as Jodna (patchwork to the body); and the atten≠dants (majawar) also, when reminding her of food, would address her in that sense. 

    A regular visitor to Hazrat Babajan could never miss hearing her constant mutterings to herself, worded some≠what like this : "Vermins are troubling me incessantly, I sweep them away, but still they keep on gathering. " Simul≠taneous with these mutterings, unintel≠ligible to listeners, she would keep on moving the palms of the hand all over her body, as if removing dust or cob≠webs. 

    Hazrat Meher Baba, when question≠ed as to the meaning 



and significance of the above meaning≠less utterances and the almost constant movement of the hands, gave the following illuminating explanation: "Annihilation of all Amal (actions) good and bad, means Najat (salvation) and Babajan being God-realized was much above the state of salvation. She not only had no Amal (actions) to account for, but was in a position to destroy the Antals of others. The phy≠sical body of a Saint like Babajan, when working on the earthly plane after Realization, becomes the focal point to which myriads and myriads of Amal of the universe get attracted, and getting purified in the furnace of Divinity, i.e., the body of the Saint, they go out again into the universe as spiritual Amal. Take for instance the white ants which, you know, have a tremendous power of multiplying. The queen of the white ants, a fat round bulky creature about three to four inches in length, feeds upon its on kind, the smaller ants. But the queen procreates much more than what she consumes. Likewise perfect Saints like Babajan give out more  spiritual Amal to the world than what they destroy. Hence it is that living Saints are a blessing and mercy to the world, whether one knows it or not." This condition (hala) in Saints is the aspect of Divine love and beauty (Shane-jamal). 

Hazrat Babajan often times when the aspect of Divine glory (Shaneófatal) possessed her, used to rave and grum≠ble in the following strain: "Why do you torment my children; nay you even kill them. They have done no wrong to you. Do I not feed you, and clothe you? What is it you lack? And still you per≠petrate all these atrocities on them. What have I done to merit all this?" Words conveying this sense have been frequently heard from Babajan and naturally they gave rise to some guess≠work on the part of the hearers, who in≠terpreted the words to mean that Babajan was remembering and be≠moaning the loss of her children who perhaps were cruelly dealt with by her people. 

Hazrat Meher Baba, when ques≠tioned on the point, explained: " There can be nothing further from truth; Babajan 



was never married and had no children. By children, she evidently meant the Saints of the time (Awliyaeówaqt), who are misunderstood, vilified and persecuted by the churches of all denominations, unmindful of the cir≠cumstances of which they are the outcome. Babajan was equally con≠cerned with the enlightened and the ignorant, and hence her reference to feeding and clothing of the latter. She was as much for the material well-being of the world at large, as for the spiri≠tuality of the godly few whom she cal≠led her children."

    Hazrat Babajan 's spiritual status in the hierarchy of Saints is that of Qutub. Literally the word Qutub means a peg or a pin, and a Qutub functioning on the physical plane is the hub round which the universe revolves. Babajan 's subjective experience (halat) of Gnosis (Irfan), would be described by Sufis as that of SalikóMajzoob. After God-realization one returning to normal consciousness is possessed both of Divinity and Gnosis (Haqiqat and Marefat). When Divinity is uppermost in him he is called a Majzoob, and when Gnosis predominates he is a Salik. Babajan had both these aspects in her equally balanced, and hence she was the SalikóMajzoob of the time, possessing all the characteristics of a Qalandar. 

Hazrat Babajan, like all Qutubs (Perfect Masters), had a circle of twelve disciples and the spiritual chargeman there-of is Hazrat Meher Baba of "Meherabad" (District Ahmednagar). She stood in the unique position of a mother (the store house of spirituality) to all the Saints of the time. 

Once a Fakir complained that Baba Tajuddin's durbar was more lavish and free in providing worldly amenities than hers; Babajan retorted by saying, "What can Tajuddin give? He gives what I give Him. " This incident is signi≠ficantly eloquent of Babajan 's relation≠ship with Saints referred to above. 

After a spiritual sojourn of about 35 years in Poona, Hazrat Babajan left her mortal coil on 21st September 1931 at the ripe old age of 125 years. Her funeral procession was a tremendous affair, never accorded to any dignitary or royalty in the annals of Poona. Her remains were laid at rest 



at the very spot* underneath the neem "Cycles change, the tree where she sat and dispensed Divine worlds rotate, Grace for such a long number of years, But Qutubs ne'er their thus confirming the Sufi belief, that: seat vacate." 
