Sufism 

Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

    Sufism is the esoteric cult of Islam, the religion founded by the Prophet of Arabia. Historians differ very much as to its origin in time and place. Some ante-date its source to a pre-Islamic period, and a few consider it a later infiltration after the conquest of Persia by the Mohamedans. The majority, however, do not countenance the theory that Sufism is an Hellenic product or a Persian complex acquired by Islam. They strongly maintain that it is a by≠product of the Quranic teaching itself. 

There is no denying the fact t hat the Quran itself is responsible in devel≠oping the mystical aspect of Islamic religion, popularly known as Sufism. The exoterics laid emphasis on the letter of the Quranic text and they form the preponderant majority as repre≠sented by the Church of Islam. With these on the side of Faith-belief in one God, Mohamed the messenger, Al-Quran the angels, the day of judgment and on the side of action, Namaz (prayers), fasting, Haj (pilgrimage to Mecca) and Zakat (poor tax) was a sufficient guarantee of a moral life on earth and a sure passport to heaven after death. They were deeply imbued with the idea of sin, and, to them, salvation meant escape from the fires of Hell and the attainment of Paradiseóa highly magnified picture of the sense pleasures of this life. They looked upon (Allah) Almighty God, as the supreme judge perched up high above the (Arsh) seventh heaven, dispensing justice to sinners and His mercy to the righteous. The Muslims, his slaves must, of necessity, because of their sinful origin, dedicate their lives to avert his wrath and induce his grace by acts of worship, repentance and humility. In short, the God of an orthodox Muslim is a God of fear, not of love. 

The esotericsóthe Sufis insisted upon interpreting the spirit of the Quranic teaching and believed in indi≠vidual 



initiative and effort as more conducive to spiritual benefit than the levelling influence of common dogma and ritual. Not feeling satisfied at being spoon-fed by the established Church of Islam on questions concerning the why and where-fore of existence, the origin and the ultimate destiny of man, etc., they began to probe into and investigate the matter independently. Like the exoterics they, too, based their Philosophy on the Q u r a n i c text, and claimed to derive authority and sanction for their Theosophy from the common source. The Sufis ignored the letter and imbued the spirit of Quranic teachings. They affirmed that there was a world of spiritual knowledge and information hidden away behind the words of the Holy Book waiting to be explored by a sincere student. One such successful seeker of Truth, Moulana Rumi, could not resist blurting out the truth when he said, 

"Marrow have I extracted 

from Quran to be sure; 

Discarding mere bones for dogs 

to fight over." The word 'marrow'   here  evidently means 'spiritual' Truth, and bones signifies the quibbling of words by learned divines which very often gives rise to mutual bickerings and condem≠nation. 

It is an admitted fact that Sufism in some covert or overt form did exist during the life-time of the Prophet Mohamed and his famous companions. Nay, the Prophet himself is looked upon by the Sufis as the first illustrious mystic of the order, and Hazrat Ali, the first one to be endowed with the esoteric or spiritual charge of the domain of religion symbolized by the Prophet bestowing the 'black mantle' to the latter in the presence of all his companions. Hazrat Ali has an unique position amongst the mystics of Islam. Practically all the Muslim saints, the world over, trace their spiritual lineage to him, and, in him, all the different orders of Sufism are said to converge. 

ASCETIC STAGE 

The first stage of Sufism was charac≠terized by ascetism and quietism, and there was little mystical about it. The early Sufis attracted very little 



notice and were considered to be harmless maniacs suffering from some form of neurosis. 

ECSTATIC STAGE 

It was in the ecstatic stage, about three centuries after; the Prophet, that Sufism compelled the attention of orthodoxy. The Sufi poets, of this era, made free use of sensuous terms like beauty, love, wine, tavern, etc., to describe their individual approach and experience of divinity. This unlicensed form of address to God, smacking of familiarity and insolence, compelled orthodoxy to denounce them as heretics. Never≠theless this libertinism in matters divine had a subtle appeal to the masses who found therein a refreshing change from a life of restraint and discipline imposed by the Church. In course of time the 'man in the street' openly began to advocate the Sufi way. Some miracles, evinced by a few notable Sufis of the day, not only invested them with an halo of sanctity and saintliness but made the cult of Sufism a serious rival to the established Church of Islam. 

THEOLOGICAL STAGE

    It is at this crucial stage in the history of Islam that the famous Theologian, Imam Ghazali, assumed prominence by successfully trying to harmonize the rivalry between dogma and reason which threatened to accentuate the cleavage past redemption. The execu≠tion of the renowned Sufi, Mansoor≠bid-Hullaj, by orthodoxy for the utterance of the famous blasphemy Anal-Huq (I am God) is symptomatic of the resentment felt by the Islamic Church towards latitudinarianism in matters religious. On the contrary, the defence of Mansoor by prominent Sufis of the day, who called him a martyr in the way of God, is a pointer to the extent of their drifting away from the moorings of conventionalism. 

Orthodoxy, faced with an ever-increasing wave of rationalism and mystic individualism, thought it expedient to give Sufi saints and their miracles an Islamic status, but not without some reservations. The Sufi saints came to be tolerated as religious freaks, an exception rather than the rule, and not a pattern not to be emulated by a true Muslim. There was no harm in their being approached for material 


gain, but to entrust one's spiritual welfare to such irresponsible guides no true believer should think of when the sure 'path of religion' (shariat) was there for all. 

MYSTICAL STAGE 

Henceforth, fear of ostracism and persecution being removed, the mystical aspect of Sufism became more pronounced. The Sufis, in spite of their rationalism and mystical experiences had, up to now, invariably conformed to the external form of religion. Now the tendency was notice-able to dispense with externalism altogether. The Islamic Church had, by now, learned to canonise many Sufis of a high spiritual calibre as saints, in spite of their non-conformity to dogma and ritual; but it refuses, even today, to accord official recognition to any saint or spiritual Master out-side the pale of Islam, whatever be his spiritual worth. 

After this synoptic survey of the origin and growth of Sufism meant for the edification of those not familiar with the subject, let us study what a real and perfect Sufi is like; what is his subjective experience of Truth and his objective attitude towards established religion. 

Sufi is another term, in Islamic world, used very loosely to signify anyone from a beginner to one of highest spiritual attainment, like the word Wali designating anyone from a neophyte to an adept (Kamil). A Sufi is generally one who is undergoing prep a ration and inner training on the spiritual path irrespective of the length of time and severity of his ordeals. But no sooner some-thing in the nature of a miracle occurs round about a Sufi than he comes to be known as Wali (saint). For the purpose of this article we are only concerned with Sufis of the highest order and what they have to say with regard to spirituality within and beyond the pale of Islam. 

    A comparative statement of some of the Sufi beliefs against orthodoxical canons of faith would be found inter≠esting: 

A Sufi affirms the seat of God to be man 's heart, while the Church points to God some-where above the clouds. The formula of Divine Unity (Tauohid) la-ilaha-illallah to an orthodox Muslim means, there is no second God; a Sufi there≠by understands that there is nothing but God. 



A Sufi believes in only one prophet or Avatar, appearing at different times in different places assuming different names, the latest being Prophet Mohamed. Islam recognizes only Hazrat Mohamed as the perfection of all prophets mentioned in the Quran. 

Sufis say, the angels are symbolic of one's awakened spiritual powers; the Church imagines them to be an inde≠pendent creation by itself. 

According to Sufis there is no such thing as Heaven or Hell. It exists in imagination, what you think, you realize. For orthodoxy it is the 'end all ' and 'be all' of their religious endea≠vours. 

The Church looks forward to day of reckoning with hope and fear, to some point of time in futurity. With the Sufis the day of judgment is here and now; they interpret the text in the Quran, "Those who are blind in this life will be blind in the hereafter," to mean that those who do not see God in this life will not see Him after death. 

    With  the Sufi there is no such thing as sin and error; to him everything is relative truth. the Church cannot shake off the idea of original sin. 

A Sufi believes in the brother-hood of man; the Church believes in the brotherhood of Islam. 

    A Sufi conceives the divinity of man; the Church concedes only the vicinity of God. 

    The Islamic Church canonizes only Muslim saints; the Sufi admits the possibility of sainthood to Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Hafiz has voiced this thought in the couplet: 

"If only the Holy Ghost were to 

help once again, others also can 

have what Jesus did attain. " 

A Sufi does not discard evolution and reincarnation. Mansoor Hallaj, Abu Muslin) Khorasani, Ahmed-ibni-Sabit, Shaikhul-Ishraq were avowed reincar≠nationists. Omar Khayyam not only expounded reincarnation (Naskh), but even admitted retrograde incarnation (Maskh). Jalaluddin Rumi openly preached evolution (Iteqa). The orthodox condemn such ideas as preposterously heathenic. 

The Sufis divide the world 



into two main divisions. viz., Muslim≠bil-lisam (Muslims by profession) and Muslim-bil-qalb (Muslims by convic≠tion). The first category consists of all Muslims, Sufis or otherwise, who conform to Shariat (cannons of Islam). To the latter category belong all Muslims and non-Muslims who have realized Truth and God irrespective of their external form and behaviour. Muslims, by conviction, look upon Shariat (the Law) as the means to an end and not the terminus of one 's religious life. There are higher realms of spiritual progress to be explored, viz., Tariqat (the mystical journey), Maarifat (Gnosis) and Haqiqat reality). A few bold utterances of the Sufis, expressed in different stages of spiritual unfoldment, are given here, and will be found very illuminating. Some of these utterances have been responsible for causing the Sufi concerned untold diffi≠culties and persecution at the hands of orthodoxy. 

"A man divested of all desire is 

veritable God " 

-Abu Mohomed Martash 

"Prophet Mohomed was God 

Himself and none else." 

-Mohomed Shareef 

"The Kafirs ( infidels ) are not 

the non-Muslims, but men of 

God who are condemned and  persecuted by the Church, be≠cause, being with God, they do not profess the faith of the masses."  

-Omar Farooq"One observing external forms of religion, even after realization, is a dualist (Mushrik). " 

-Ghaosul Azam Gilani "He is not a God who allows Himself to be temperamentally controlled and affected by hu≠man acts, good and bad. " 

-Abubkr Wasity "Man is the offspring of Eternity without beginning and end and not the composition of clay. " 

-Niyaz Ahmed "The heresy that takes one to God is much preferable to faith which keeps one away from Him. " 

-Bu Ali Qalander "I am Truth; so need no religion. This heresy is incumbent on me; but Musalmans ignorantly condemn it. " 

-Husain Ibni Hallaj "One moment in the company of a saint is better than an hundred years sincere piety. " 

-Moulana Rumi "Men of God are equally at home in a mosque or a tavern. " 

-Abu Sayeed Abul Khair "One who prays does not know God, and one who knows God has no need of prayers." 



-Yusuf Husain Razi "It is the intention and not the act that matters. " 

-Hadis "God and Truth is no single religion's prerogative." 

-Abu Bakr Wasity 

"Muslims and non-Muslims 
achieve and impart spirituality 
alike. The difference is in 
quantity but not in quality." 


-Ghaosali Qalander 

This, in short, is Sufism. Against this background, in the next issue of this Journal, it is intended to give a pen picture of the Perfect Sufi of the age, Hazrat Meher Baba. 