




The \/aishnavite Saints of Southern 
India and their Hagiologi* 


THE LIFE OF SAINT PERIóAZHVAR 
BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 


Our Saint was born in Shri Villi≠puttur (Tinnevelly District, Southern India) in a high aristocratic Brahmin family. His father was Mukunda, and Padma Devi was his mother. Our Saint was a born one, and was a votary of the One Almighty (Vishnu). He supplied daily flowers to the god of Shri Villiputtur, and thus served humanity. The story that the Lord Shri Krishna went into a small lane in search of a flower man illustrates a fact that He is always mindful of the lowliest of the lowly; and hence the tenderness of saints' hearts. Kuratt-Azhvar, the saint, once helped a woman of the lowest caste in Shrirangam. The saints always serve humanity with the eight mental flowers. 

In Madura, the capital of the Pandyan Kings, King Vallabha Deva  reigned in those days. He was rich and he wanted nothing material. But he was very anxious to know the Truth of Moksha (liberation) and the purport of Vedant (the Knowledge as revealed by the Vedas). He, therefore, summoned the learned pandits from all parts of his wide kingdom for a learned discussion on the subject. He said that the victor would be suitably rewarded. Many pandits came to the capital in response to the King 's command. Saint Peri-Azhvar dreamt a dream directing him to attend the intellectual assembly in the Pandyan capital. He went and was received with due honour by the King. Discussion began. Our Saint opened the debate and began thus : 

"Great pandits, hear. All the Vedas appear before me. They are infallible. The letter 'A' is the beginning of all al-

*Continued from January 1939 issue. 



phabet. Lord Shri Krishna says, that He is the letter 'A'. Vishnu is Narayana. He is the Para-Brahma, the Uncaused Cause from whom all creation flows, endures and to whom returns. He who aspires for liberation (Moksha) shall, therefore, meditate on Him, for He alone is the Grantor there-of... " Thus he discoursed at length, and the audience sat petrified. The King gave him the prize and otherwise rewarded him munificently. But our Saint was as modest as ever. Ordinarily, 

"Man though a worm, would yet be great; Though feeble, would seem strong; Assumes an independent state, By sacrilege and wrong." Saint Nammazhvar himself exclaimed: "Myself, I, not under -standing, Laboured under 'I' and 

'mine'." But to the Perfect Saint, all things re≠mind of God, and such Saints are Gods on earth. 

    It is said that the love our Saint bore  

to God was 'benedictory'. This requires  clear explanation. The Saint addressed Him thus: "Here is my God, the All-knowing, the All-powerful, the All-protecting! 0, Beauty Transcendent! Charm irresistible! Thou art above time and its changes. Thou art worthy of receiving the adorations of the ever-seeing immortals. " This was his Sage-Mood, where we see the relationship of Protector and protected. Again he addressed the Lord thus: "But here Thou art, in a place under the sway of time; here the changing and passing; here the hell compared to Thy Heaven; here where spiritual light is eclipsed. Coming from so high, how mayest Thou render Thyself patent to our senses in an atmosphere reeking with the undivine! Love for Thee makes me not to forget myself, Love for Thee does not strike me down senseless. I recover; I rise above that sentiment; for fear for Thee rises uppermost in my breast, for Thy safety; the safety for one so worthy in the unworthy land. This fear is more than Love. Love for the Beloved begets forgetfulness; but fear supervenes and keeps me above that drowning flood. Oh, let nothing mar Thy Beauty; let nothing steal Thy Strength; let nothing rob from Thy Glory. Let me bless Thee thus my God! Let me bless Thee as the parent, the child. " Here in the Saint-Mood the relationship of Protector and protected has changed places. The Saint assumes the character of Benedictor and Protector. This is what is called "The love of benevolence" by Rev. F. 



W. Faber in his "Creator and Creature". He explains it thus:

"The love of benevolence is one which has been commonly practised by the saints, and often has seemed childish, or at least mere poetry, to those who love God less fervently. There is a strange pleasure in it from our putting ourselves in an impossible position towards God, in order to confer it on Him. We make ourselves as it were His benefactors, instead of He being ours. We put ourselves on an equality with Him, or even above Him. So it seems. Yet in reality this love of benevolence is the fruit of a holy humility too deep for words, almost too deep for tears. By the love of bene≠volence we, first of all, wish God to be more perfect, if it were possible, than He really is. Yet what a wild impossibi≠lity! But if God 's love of His creatures is itself so exaggerated, He must let us love Him with the simplicity of these fervid exaggerations. Moreover this habit of wishing God impossible per≠fections is not only the result of a more worthy and true appreciation of His perfection and his Majesty, but it tends also to produce it, to sustain it, and to increase it. It is at once the cause and the effect of honourable thoughts of God. Another while the love of ben≠evolence takes the form of venturesome congratulations. We wish God all the immense joy of His unimaginable per≠fections. We know that He possesses it without our wishing it. We know that our wishes cannot swell one drop from the mighty sea of His interior jubi≠lation. But it is an expression of our love, not in words only, but in inward sentiment which, in His sight, is an act, and a meritorious act. We bid Him rejoice. We wish Him countless happy returns of that internal festival which He has in His own blissful Self. 

Or another while, by the same love of benevolence, we wish Him all increase of His accidental glory; and our wish is efficacious prayer, and obtains for Him a real augmentation of that particular glory. The very wish of itself adds to it, and adds immensely when it comes out of a pure heart and fervent spirit. It also obtains grace of others, and makes the cause of God to prosper in the world. Sometimes we earnestly desire that He may have accidental glory which He does not receive. We  wish that  purga-tory were emptied into heaven or that there were no hell, or that all the heathen were converted, or that all wanderers might return to the fold, or that some one day or night there might be no mortal sin in all our huge metropolis. All this, which the saints have reduced to as many practices as there have been saints to practise it, is the love of benevolence." 



Thus our Saint lived and enjoyed by blessing Him, died love-delirious of the Lord, and attained Moksha. 


