


St. Teresa of Spain* 

Adapted by WILL BACETT (London) 

Inspiring and wonderful as is the record of such experience, the world today may receive another presentation of the "Will of the Lord" to which Teresa gave up her being. This age of mental activity and scientific discovery reveals the law of "Cause and Effect" in new light, and it seems to daze some, concealing the Truth enshrined in the Church. Cause and Effect, that law of Karma, is equally a presentation of the Will of God, but as we are within its operation, it is difficult to realize it in perspective, seeing that the instrument of understanding, the mind, would be required to transcend the very limi≠tations it itself has brought about. It is the mind that creates the illusion that the phenomenal world is real. Rather is that world a school of experience whereby the process of understanding proceeding from the infinitesimal to the infinite, must learn to reject those inter≠mediate conclusions which clog its pro≠gress, due to the Sanskaras which pre≠vent proper appreciation of the One Infinite Whole. 

A God-realized person is able to treat the whole position differently, and explain, and more important still, live in the full consciousness demonstrating the Truth of Man's Infinite Eternal Existence and identity with the All. 

    In treating of the journey of the Soul through Creation to the Oversoul, Shri Meher Baba puts the position clearly:"Here one might ask whether God-realization means any real advantage to the Soul, and the question can best he answered by understanding the distinc≠tion between two types of advantages. The first consists in getting what we do not previously possess, and the second type of advantage consists in realizing fully what we really are...The soul who is not God-realized experiences itself as being finite, and is constantly troubled by the opposition of 



fleeting joys and sorrows, but the soul who is God-realized knows himself to be Infinite and experiences the infinite Bliss and Knowledge of God.* 

The life of devotion that Teresa exemplified, she combined with Karma Yoga. She writes: "That prayer is most acceptable which leaves the best re-sults...in actions. That is true prayer, not certain gusts of softness and feeling and nothing more...I count that to be a good prayer that leaves me more humble, even if it is still with great temptations, tribulations, aridities. For it must never be thought that because a man has much suffering, therefore he cannot have prayed acceptably. His suffering is as incense set before God..."Ü Today we can feel her serene spirit hovering over her suffering country, and sustaining her people as she did three and a half centuries ago... repeating the words she then wrote to those in trouble who appealed to her : " Our Lord seems treating you like a val- iant Soul."Ü 

    "There is no progress on the spiritual path without suffering.* Teresa's life as a practical reformer of the Carmelite Order, to which she restored the ori≠ginal rule of enclosure, had as its object the establishment of centres of prayer and holy living, so to permeate the life of the Nation. She "looked out on the farce of this life, so ill-ordered "Ü and saw a country just freed from the domination of the Moors, revealing in its over-seas treasures to which Colum≠bus had led its adventurous spirits, and in the van of European prosperity, creating in art and literature and the crafts and heritage for succeeding generations. This material progress was shared by the Church, and wealth and territory had accrued to its establish≠ments, so that abbots and abbesses controlled wide lands, often living in great state and exercising civil as well as religious authority. Knights and men at arms and the great ladies thronged their halls which resembled the 



King's own palace in pomp and splen≠dour, and true spirituality languished. The more physical difficulties she had to face were tremendous. Travelling, especially for an aged and ailing woman, over the rough paths on foot or in small tented donkey carts, (for roads were few), the primitive accommoda≠tion at the inns, when available, ex≠posure to the elements, and lack of provision for the essentials at the journey's end, as well as the rule of poverty she enjoined, were met by her in the spirit of a crusader to whom every obstacle became a sign of her Lord's test for her faith. Thus she sustained the failing spirit of her com≠panions. The opposition from within the Church, from high dignitaries as well as the nuns who opposed the stricter rule, and others together with difficulties from City Authorities, lack of funds, would have been insuperable, but she lived in the faith that she was but carrying out a higher Will, and finally succeeded where even Popes had failed previously. Her humility and tact and the complete absence of egotism which the following disclose, must have cleared many obstacles mak- ing foes into friends. 

    It was the occasion of her installation as Prioress of the "Incarnation" to which the nuns were opposed. The latter surged into the Chapter Room, only to see in the usual seat of the Prioress, the statue of the Virgin, holding the keys of the Convent, and with Teresa at her feet seated. Thus disarmed, they listened in silence to her words: 

    "Ladies, Mothers and my Sisters, our Lord has sent me to this House to undertake this post, by reason of my obedience, one which I as little ex≠pected as deserved. This election has given me great distress, not only be≠cause it has forced duties upon me which I may not be able to fulfill, but also because it has deprived you of the control which you possessed over your own elections, and given you a Prioress against your will. I come only to serve you and to minister to your pleasure, as far as I am able. And to this end I hope the Lord will help me greatly. For as to the rest, any one of you can teach and reform me. For that reason, I consider, my ladies, that what I can do for 



each of you, I will do it willingly, even to the shedding of blood and giving up my life. ...My desire is that we should all serve the Lord with suavity. " 

She took a journey, at the age of 67, to make her last foundation, despite fever and the floods which had washed away bridges. Plunging into a stream, she called out to her nuns: "Now then, my daughters, what greater privilege do you desire than to become martyrs for the Love of God ?"* 

Ever a real mother of souls whose zeal inspired her nuns, she also knew the value of relaxation, and the nuns often gathered round her, spinning, sometimes singing Teresa 's own bright and happy verses on episodes in con≠vent life, while those who could, would accompany on the pipe, drum, tambour≠ine or castinet. When they complained that domestic duties kept them from devotions, she would say: "Be not discouraged, my children, for if obed≠ience employs you in outward things, know that even if you are in the kitchen, our Lord moves amidst the pots and pans helping us both within 

and without."  By her  gentle humour, she dispelled over-seriousness. "Let each one give us the benefit of her intelligence today, " she would say at re≠creation, "no one has too much."

    To an introspective fellow Prioress, sick in body and mind, she writes forcefully: "If you would sometimes believe what I say, we should avoid a great deal of trouble...Take no notice of the interior troubles you mention...The greater they are the more you ought to despise them...For the love of God, get well, eat enough and be not too much alone or think much. Occupy yourself with what you can and how you can. I wish I were with you. I should have a number of amusing tales to tell you." 

    Wrote to a novice in trouble: "What tempts your reverence to think you are making no progress will on the contrary be of the greatest benefit to you as time will show. God is treating you as one who dwells in his palace...Let Him do as He wills with your soul as His bride...The novelty of the life and its practices may seem to have destroyed your peace... Later all blessings will come together...Glory in helping God to bear the Cross and do not be eager for delights. Mercenaries are paid day by day. Serve without pay as nobles fight for an earthly king and may the King of Heaven be with you.* 



Like others, she knew loneliness of soul, and would turn for solace to the Psalms, for she loved King David, another saint of earlier age. In the 102nd Psalm she would read: "I have watched and become as a sparrow alone on the house-top. How much greater my comfort when these persons were such as David...The soul is then, so I think, not in itself but in the house≠top...above itself and above all created things; for it seems to me to have its dwelling higher than in the highest part of itself."Ü 

Her writings in the language of the people, on inner spiritual experience, brought her into some disfavour with the Inquisition, who retained her Autobiography for some years, ultimately releasing. Written at the command of her spiritual superiors in the Church, it cost her much suffering to commit to writing for the eye of another, the inner experience of her sensitized nature. But she was ever obedient to the Church and its discipline. 

She records how she had to combat for 20 years the natural pleasure she derived from mixing with her fellows in the Convent parlour, to which came those outside, as the Convent did not belong to an enolosed order. By all ordinary standards, there would be no need to struggle against a practice sanctioned by the rules. But Teresa felt that her whole life must be devoted to her God, and she struggled until she attained that fixity of purpose: 
