 



The Voice 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 

Shri Meher Baba has said: "For twelve years no word has passed my lips. Yet I am never silent. I speak eternally. The Voice that is heard deep within the soul is my Voice, the Voice of inspiration, of intuition, of guidance. Through those who are receptive to this Voice, I speak." 

And so He speaks to me through mouth of sou1. By life within, through the deep unfathomable work that is in use by Him, I in me know that He in me was, and ever was, the Guide. When He sends His life message, He speaks in ways one can inwarldly realize. 

    He, as the Voice, says: "Be my own, and be the One in the whole of you. I in you reordain the whole. "

    One has to be in love with God, then, in turn, can one be given to love man. Man cannot in him realize the God, until man has in him, in the human form, surrendered the human and the God. 

"You, as  the divine individual, owe the God in One-All Pure Divine State in Calm. "

    The individual outward show in you as human, the outward dispute, the problem, the difficulty, that, I in you have to remove. I am the Removing Form in you. I in you owe the pure ordaining order in its onward force of will that can remove. I in you do the removing work. Leave it to me. " 

"In you, as human, you owe the Divine Element that I in you reorder to act; and beseech you to be in you the Control. I in you reorder the form of God. That what in you, in any of you, is in dispute is The Divine in its Spirit Act as human. It is the Spirit that now in you, who is indifferent to the world, acts as pure expansion. In the deep of the Sum of all Experience in the human is the Divine Creation Order, and that is Law." 

"The Law in you, in any 

óis I." 

"The Law in you, in any 

óis Good." 

"All the work in life, as the Divine in the human, I stir. All the work, in the work of the human, I control. That what is you in the work, in the One growing Soul and Spirit, is I. What I in you, in the human sow, as expansion in Consciousness, I, in the work in the universe, owe and show in Real Evolution Fact. As Fact, I in you show the Work's Result. You create in you, in the human, another new individual that I grow near in its own work's Divine result, to the pure point of Truth. All in the work in the human is I. That can be Experience, and it can be but Intuition. In any of the two cases, it is difficult to say what is real, what is good or what is false. " 



"The Truth Design in the human, in the sum of all human, in the sum of all creation, I in you show, sow and order; that you can see, feel and find in your own human. It is indispensable that I in you owe the indispensable work, it is indispensable that I in you am the Life. 

"I in you owe to be the Pure Truth. "

 "One or the other way, in the Main way's renewing show in all in nature, and in the humsn, I in all owe the Crea- 

tion Order." 

"I in you owe, see and feel and act. I see and feel when I in you owe the Pure Impulse." 

    "Remember in your own outward deeds and acts that I in you am the All in One containing Pure Truth. It is im≠portant and real and good and imper≠ative that you should have the winning will to be in the new and old, in the pure and impure, in the pure and false, in the unreal and unconscious without experience. It is indifferent that you in you sow the experience. The sum of all pure Being in pure Expansion in all and any, in its All-One-Act of universe is I. It is unimportant that you in you in the human, do or sow or show more or less, or full, or half or any experience. The experience has to go. The lure to be has to go. All in its all one outward pure experience has to go. What is of use, and has but use, and is and was Use, is and was and ever is, the One, as the individual outcome. All design in life in the human, in new, in old, in good, in wrong, in the individual, in the work, in the universe, has none other but 



' 

the impersonal Use s use. That is real and true. All is use. All is work. All is nature in tune with God 's work, and in the human it is all the One in All work." 

"The All-One-Status, reordains orders, in its one-all ordering outward show the Life, the lure to be in the human; and the One-in-All as the Divine Individual, can in the human as Life, as Pure Being, as Good, as God 's all One Pure Existence, bring in the work of all life, the Transmutation that is indispen≠sable." 

"I can see in all directions and I am in all directions the pure Divine Indi≠vidual that can and has and is the new in the old order of Pure. When I saw you in the state of one that can but bring out, throw off and do in its own, as I want it, I knew it was the time to be in you the Divine Voice."

    "I am in you the Divine Voice. When I am in you in your own individual conscience the individual show of lure to reorder and change you in your own indispensable good, in your own indispensable bad, then, I in you sow the pure Divine indispensable Intuition that creates in you the lure, and gives you the individual experience; and in experience does the Work in your show as indispensable Result." 

"Let me say in you, in all, in any, the Right and Good is more in you than you can operate as you, as the human. Let it be done by me. Give in, in the Divine of you. In you is the Divine indispensable indifferent good, indis≠pensable pure show that I do control. Let its work's use be to you of use and in me of none but Good. " 

"I know you since the day of all alive experience." 

"In you as Creation, I owe you, and I in you sow you as Divine Individual. Let it be the One in I, in All-in-One, that is and has the control over you. Let it be the One-in-All that has the pure re≠ordering form of Being in you as the human. When I say to you: Give me you. Be me. I in you owe your own human, then see and sow and under≠stand." 

"Be and be in you the One in its all One indispensable act of Divine In≠dividual outward pain. All in the life in man is pain in good, pain in bad, good in all, in one way in pain. It is pain. My universal 



work's pain, my universal design in life in the human in its One-all-Way of Divine Indispensable Evolution, it is all pain. In the human, in the soul, in all, in any. In its motion Creation is pain. Be in it quiet, sure, pure, good. Leave the act in the mind, give no reaction, give no more individual attention to its work's use. Leave it to me. " 

"I will cure the pain, the world's work." 

"I am the New Life. The One-in-All. The Pure Truth. I am Creation in Love. All in you, in any in you, I owe the new in old work's use. Let it be doing. Have it be done. Give me the Love that I in you sow. Give me the Love that I in you ordain and awaken. Let it be done in the sum of all life and that is me. "

    "Be me. Sow me. See me." 

"I have none but one indispensable design to operate in the human, and that is to give to the human the new Work 's use. The new Work 's use is good. It is Divine, indispensable, individual Intui≠tion. It is Divine individual Faith. It is Divine individual good in Love. All this I am to be in all, in any. Sow the new work's use in you by being calm individual. Patient. Strong in the be≠seeching cry. Deep in the longing soul. Good in dispute. Good in pain. Try the new work's use by being in my One, the One that I have to have in the sum total of work, I am about to disinterest in the world's work. Give me the new in you. Bring in me the pure in you. Leave in me the soul. I will bring in the sum total of all in you, in the individual soul, the Supreme Individual Reali≠zation. It is the same in you, in I, in One, that it is to be in full act in fact. In the Work 's Use you shall be me. I in you, in One, in all, in any, owe the controlling life, time, space, and individual expansion in its All One, as the God, as Union, as Creation Show of pure Existence. That is the Theme that is in you in slow awakening. That is in One in you, the sum total of pure Being, in slow, indispensable creation action as exchange in consciousness. Let it all be, and let it all try and show in its own Way 's Way. Be my subject, and in its subjective experience shall it be and in its all one act shall it operate and become fact. The fact I am in you, Sow me in Divine experience. Be and understand, it is all the same Work 's Use."



    "I in you show the Way. I in you owe the Way." 

"I am in you the New in old in its One-all-Way reordaining work in Love." 

    "It is indispensable that you know me. It is indispensable that you show me in your own one in all Way 's Use."

    "All is Divine Theme. All is im≠portant and indispensable Truth ex≠pansion. Life, man, human, good, God, is all one pure Order in Being that in its One-in-All Work's Use has to reordain the same pure outward effect and that is GoodóGodóhuman individual. Sow, see and create the individual indis≠pensable effort to understand."

    "I am the Divine, individual Result." "In me liveóin me alive, die. " 

"I will in you be the Truthóthe Divine Life." 

"I am your Divine Light. I am your Divine Experience." 

"I am your All-in-One becoming All-One State of God. See this in action. See in its work your own profession and try to find in the Way, in the Path,  in the sum of all expansion, the One-All, the One-in-All Solution. That what I in you owe is indispensable creation order." 

"That drink in, bring out, live, be≠come. " 

"I have one word in the whole of you to experience, and that is Love. That I show in you. That Ióindispensable Truthóshow. That I, indispensable winning view in the human, owe to have to be. The aim of all experience is to have no other experience but me. " 

"Have no one in you but me. Sow no one in you but I." 

    "Be in its work 's Use the impersonal instrument. I will in you the dual experience, and in the dual experience in you, I individually on to the One, show the Way. It is impersonal and personal work. It is high, individual inspiration. It is individual outcome. Whatever I in its imperative work 's use do is One. It is in its onward work individual multiplicity 's work. Let me in you be the sign of you in dual disassociation; let me be in you the Divine Expansion. Let me be in you the Divine Experience. Let it be whatever is the onward outward order of pure expression." 



 All the new Word 's use is mere passing expression of the old sure order of Divine Intuition. When you hear my Voice, say: It is Him. When I sow the Voice low in its own low show of Divine Intuition, say: It is the One. When I in you outwardly appear and sow the Word's Use in actual pain, in joy, in fever of obscure individual struggle, say: It is Him, He is me in the Voice. When I in you individually reordain the use of life, see to be sure that I in you show the Way to God."

"See in its use in Word, in emotion, in lure to be, in work in individual in≠spiration, the Divine Theme. It is in≠dividual and universal. It is impure and good. It is clean and unconsciously unclean. It is good and unconsciously bad. It is right and it is false. " 

"Leave it to me and to the God in you to act and to resurrect. Leave in you the God, and be in the God's Use the indispensable individual. Leave it to me to have the right work 's use. Leave it to me to give you the individual use. "

    "To be in me, is to have no one but  



. 

but me. " 

"To live in me, is to be in me, in all, in any, the one all pure whole universal Soul in expansion in love." 

"To love in me is to have no one but me. " 

"To love me in them who do but obscure the view of Divine indis≠pensable work's use, be indifferent." 

"Let it have in its view's way; one≠all-outcome. " 

"Be in me. Work in me. Be in my indispensable individual." 

These words I have heard from Him given unto me, from Him the Being in me. His work 's use being the 'I', is working in me through Intuition. He is the impersonal act in Being in life in new awakening. The impersonal state within, that in us is Voice, is to us Life that in Being does the work. It is in us pure expansion in Being that in us is the work. It is life in being that in us is the Truth. We in the working Being see, know, feel, through the new awak≠ening that He in us is the experience of Life as pure indivisible Life that is Reality. 


