St. Teresa Of Spain* 

Adapted by Will Backett (London) 

Teresa's facility for describing her own inner experiences renders her a practical theologian and psychologist of real value to those who lack a spiritual Director. Those who are so fortunate to have a Master, owe much to 'His love and pre-vision' by which some dif≠ficulties are avoided.

 Teresa shared with some other Saints and those who journeyed on the Path similar experiences of vision, trance and ecstasy, and heard voices guiding her, divining words of counsel from Saints like St. Clare, St. Joseph, etc., uttered to her soul without audible sound. She also experienced deceptive visions, learnt to discriminate, and warns all against seeking supernatural and extraordinary experiences. One of her nuns who thought she was having revelations "made her eat and sleep more, and she also reduced her pen≠ances," curing her of a subtle tendency to egoism. 

After the vision had passed away, the valuable experience would follow in its fruition, when ordinary senses cease to function..."I do not say that the soul sees and hears when the rapture is at its highest. I mean by 'at its highest' when the faculties are lost, because pro≠foundly united with Godófor then it neither sees nor hears nor perceives as I believe. 

"When our Lord shows the soul much of His grandeur and majesty it would be impossible for the soul to endure it if our Lord did not succour it in a most supernatural way by throwing it into a trance of ecstasy whereby the vision is lost in the fruition thereof ." Ü 

Such manifestations of finer con≠sciousness and states of being, involve a most sensitised physical condition, often accompanied by suffering. Others have described this, as did Teresa and Anna Kingsford who passed through the 
  

heaven worlds, when in vision in Paris on 23rd July 1877. She saw the ancient Gods of Greece, India, Egypt and Scan≠dinavia, and beyond these a vision of Deity. 

"Forth from His right hand streams the Universe, projected by the omni≠potent repulsion of His will; back to His left... returns the Universe, drawn by the attraction of His love."á 

But Anna Kingsford also had the higher Truth given to her: "Within thee, 

o man, is the universe, the threshes of all the Gods are in thy Temple. I have said unto men, 'Ye are Gods. Ye are all in the image of the Most High. ' No man can know God until he first understands himself. God is nothing that man is not. What man is God is likewise. As God is the heart of the outer world, so is God the heart of the world within thee. When the God within thee shall be wholly united to the God without, then thou shalt be One with the Most High. Thy will shall be God's will, and the son shall be as the Father." ß 

The Infinite is beyond all forms. "In themselves the Gods have no forms. They, however, assume forms for the sake of mortals." ∂

 "Consciousness alone has direct con≠nection with God. It is not by the multiplication of phenomena, however subtle, that progress is made ... The life of an ordinary good man in the world seeking to fulfil his duty, is of more value spiritually than a Yogi 's spent in exploring the heaven worlds... There is marked difference between the path of the occultist and the mystic, the former being concerned in the development of 'powers' by which to explore the wonders of the heaven worlds. Consci≠ousness alone has direct connection with God." Ü 

Teresa and her friends were at first puzzled at her recurring states of unconsciousness. On the spiritual path, the soul, turning inward, has conscious≠ness on the inner 


plane, and so the physical plane is superceded while it continues. This is called by the Sufi Fana, is succeeded by Baka 'the state of abiding'. The 'fruition' experienced by Teresa prob≠ably corresponded in some measure to this. Teresa uses the simile of the Interior Castle of the Soul "made of diamonds of most clear crystal, in which are many rooms, as in heaven there are many mansions. "' The seven rooms therein symbolize the seven stages of the soul, and in the innermost dwells the Divine Spark of the Soul wherein the actual union with God is experienced. She realized the spiritual gift of Grace, received in greater and increasing degree: "It is one Grace that our Lord gives Grace, and it is another Grace when the Lord gives under≠standing of that Grace."* 

Four degrees in the stages of Prayer are indicated by her with deep insight, in the allegory of watering a garden, by hand, or with engine and bucket, or from a stream, and finally by showers of rain, when ... "The Lord waters it without labour on our part. Throughout the earlier stages, the Soul is develop≠ing, passing from the prayer of med≠itation, to the prayer of Quiet, where it begins to be recollected. It is now in touch with the supernatural. This is a gathering together of the faculties of the soul within itself in order that it may have the fruition of that Con≠tentment in greater Sweetness. But the faculties are not lost, neither are they asleep. The Will alone is so occupied that without knowing that it has become captive, it gives a simple con≠sent to become the Prisoner of God. This is a little spark of the True Love of Himself which the Lord begins to en-kindle in the Soul. And His Will is that the Soul should understand what Love is by the Joy it brings. 

In the third degree, the Soul is awake and the rest of the world asleep and the pleasure sweetness and delight are in≠comparably greater than in the former state of prayer. The waters of the Grace have risen up to the neck of the Soul so that it can neither ad≠


vance or retreat, nor does it know how to do so; it seeks only the fruition of exceeding bliss. 

The fourth degree of prayer includes ecstasy and rapture and beyond there is spiritual Union. When thinking of what the Soul was doing during a period of prayer just ended, the Lord said to her: "It undoes itself utterly, my Daughter, in order that it may give itself more and more to Me. It is not itself that then lives, it is I. As it cannot comprehend what it understands, it understands by not understanding."

    She described how "the soul seemed to come forth as gold out of a crucible, most refined"* after a vision when some word from the Lord had comforted her, after a misunder≠standing by her confessors. She was conscious of divine guidance through visions that showed stages of significance, just as states of prayer increased by degrees: "It pleased our Lord one day that I was in prayer, to show me His Hands and His Hands only. The beauty of them was so great that no language can describe it. A few days later, I saw His Divine Face and I was utterly entranced. Afterwards He granted me the Grace of seeing His whole Person. I could not understand why the Lord showed Himself thus by slow degrees...until afterwards I knew that His Majesty was leading me according to my human weakness."* 

Again she saw the Lord who warned her against a certain friendship. "Christ stood before me stern and grave, giving me to understand what in my conduct was offensive to Him. I saw Him with the eyes of the soul, more distinctly than I could have seen Him with the eyes of the body. "* After 26 years the Vision, so real then, remained as clear to her as when it occurred. On June 29th 1557, she saw, or rather felt Christ, "not with the eyes of the soul or with the eyes of the body, and He seemed to be close beside her. There≠after His presence was her constant realization. Some times when engaged in ordinary affairs, elevation of Spirit would come so suddenly 


that she could not withstand it..."The fruits and blessings it brings with it are in a moment mine...and this without my having had a vision, or heard anything, or knowing where I am, except that when the Soul seems to be lost, I see it make great progress which I could not have made if I had laboured for a whole year. When my Soul reached that state, my wretchedness came to an end. God is the Soul of that Soul now...giving it grace on grace...I had read books... I had no Director...but I found I really understood nothing until God made me learn by experience."* 



(To be continued) 