
My Master's Love is The Greatest 

BY M. R. DHAKEPHALKAR 

Once Akbar, then Emperor of India, was spending time with Birbal, one of his gifted ministers, in the beautiful gardens on the banks of the Jamna. The moonlight was spreading everywhere. Both had kept aside the heavy re≠sponsibility of a mighty Empire, their hearts being light they joined in a commonplace parlance. 

The Emperor asserted that there was nothing to equal mother love, but the minister could not agree to this without his characteristic reservations. When challenged to disprove the royal state≠ment, Birbal ordered one of the atten≠dants to bring a squirrel with her young one from the zoo in the garden and put them on a fountain pillar. The water was then let in and it began rising all around. 

As the water rose, the squirrel with her young one climbed up and up, finally reaching the top. The water still rose. The squirrel caught her young one and held it above her head, she was practically neck deep in water.

"Now, Birbal, look at the mother's love: you are being defeated by your own experience. Look, there, at the cost of her own life she is going to save her young one," said Akbar. 

Birbal smiled as the squirrel was on the point of being drowned; bubbles of air floated on the surface; just beneath was the young one. 'Mother love' had reached its climax. Half conscious, the squirrel slipped her young beneath her self making the instinctive effort to rise above the water. The young one was drowned beneath her weight. At the cost of the life of her own young one the mother squirrel saved herself. 

All nature was quietóthe fountain bubbled. Akbar, the mightiest of the mighty Emperors, looked at the whole scene and wondered. It was only Birbal's turn to break the silence: "Self preservation is an instinct. Emperor; the instinct proved to be stronger than love." 

My mother; she was ideal. 



I only wanted to worship my mother from the day I knew her. I knew no religion, I knew no God. We were poor, we could not even get the necessities of life. My mother was the only soul run≠ning the household of a large family; grinding, sweeping, cleaning, cooking, washing, stitching and managing with≠out any helpówithout a moment's rest. Day and night she worked and toiled. Toiled during her whole life and toiled out of it. She refused to be ill for our sake. She knew her illness would be our starvation. A career of fifty years she passed in her home, and never a moment was given to despair. She bore the cross for us. We lost our father. This is the worst lot for a Hindu wo≠man. My mother had an only wish, that she should die before my father. It was not fulfilled. It was her greatest calam≠ity and yet that sorrow she pushed aside for us. My mother's sacrifice was an ideal sacrifice. Till the last, when her life was ebbing, she would encourage us. Such love is to be experienced and not to be expressed. 

I had the conviction that there is no love equal to mother love, until I came in contact with Shri Meher Baba, my Guru, my Master. He revealed to me a still higher phase of love, love beyond this worldly Maya; call it love trans≠cendent, call it Love Divine. My moth≠er's love expected a return. A very strong tie indeed is mother's love, but binding. My Master's love is love for love's sake. It is impossible to describe this love so far greater than mother love. There are many who have served my Master with obedience and sacri≠fice; there are many who have left all their worldly affairs and are resigned to him to fulfil the Path. I belong to none of the above order. 

Once the disciples of my Master were assembled in the main hall at "Meherabad". They decided among themselves that each one should take an oath that he would serve Shri Baba in the real spirit of selfless service. A fire was brought. Some pieces of sandal≠wood were supplied. All of them, one after another, took the oath. I knew I was not strong enough to follow the oath. X. rose in the meeting and said, "Do you not take 



  

Baba to be God-realized? Why are you  When he receives me with his irresis≠ 

lagging behind for the oath?" I dared to  tible smile, I forget the whole world. I  

say, "I do not take Baba to be God- forget myself and become conscious of  

realized." I spoke against my con- that selfless love, of that purest love of  

science. I told a lie. I took Baba for  him for me without my having the  

everything. He is God-realized. He is  personal love for him which I have for  

above everything. But in order not to  my mother, and that is why I feel his  

go through with the oath, I spoke a lie,  love to be infinitely greater. 

and still my Master loves me. I am      Often I think to crush myself and end  

disobedient, and still my Master loves  my life of all responsibility, but instan≠ 

me. I am a sinner and still he loves me.  taneously do I find myself bathing in  

Is he not more than father and mother  his love which restores me. At sight of  

when he loves all beings with love for  him I forget myself. I run toward him  

love's sake without taking into consid≠ as the gopies and their cows at the  

eration their weaknesses. Once this  sound of the lute of Lord Krishna. I am  

love is awakened? all worldly loveó  attracted toward my Master as iron is  

love for wife, love for children, love for  attracted by the magnet. I am con≠ 

relationsóbecomes mere duty.  quered by him to complete submission,  

To be near Shri Baba, to get from  complete obedience, complete surren≠ 

him the slightest touch, is the highest  der. I am as a drop going back to the  

reward one can obtain. It is Bliss.  ocean and feeling the vastness of the  

ocean and its waves of Bliss.  
