
Dear Dr. Kenmore, 
Thank you for the book "God Speaks, as it has arrived. May I read and study it with a still mind and an understanding heart, that thru the wise guidance of His Words, the Lotus of my mind and the rose of my heart be opened .... I have some questions sir, that I would most sincerely appreciate, as I am in the quest of truth and there is much unenlightened doctrines here and there. If they are answered in the book, then well and good: 
(1) 
It has been said that one must have a living Guide (on the Physical Plane), to reach the station of Full God Consciousness. 

(2) 
That a Perfect Master having brought one or more disciples to God Realization, He, the Master, when He passes, leaves the order in His chosen disciple's hands. 

(3) 
Does the Society teach on the astral plane also? 

(4) 
Does Meher Baba teach at this time there? 


These questions are not just mine. 
Respectfully, 
Jack T. Allen 

Dear Jack, 

Here are Dr. Kenmore's dictated answers to your four questions asked in your last letter: 
Answer to question I: 
The Avatar and only the Avatar occupies the significantstatus of being the only One who can be your living guidewithout having a physical form to direct you. Only the Avatarwho is literally the Creator, Sustainer, and Dissolver of thisentire universe continues His personal guidance to all whoseek His help and Grace. 
The Perfect Master or Sadguru, after He leaves His body, is totally finished with the phenomenal experience. If any help is granted at the tomb of any Perfect Master, the help is given through a living Perfect Master (whether you've met Him or not) who takes on the responsibility of the devotees of the deadPerfect Master in the tomb. 
At the tomb of a Perfect Master you can only receive material benefit. At the tomb of the Avatar, only spiritual benefit is received directly from the Avatar to His sincere devotee. 
Answer to question 2: 
The Perfect Master, through His perennial contacts, through aeons of time with certain souls, finally emerges with a group of twelve men disciples and two women disciples. At the time of His body relinquishment, He givesHis Charge to one favorite disciple and only one who becomes God Realized like the Perfect Master. The remaining eleven men and two women disciples receive God Realization in future lifetimes. 
Only in the case of the Avatar, who not only has twelve men and two women disciples as His intimate circle, but also nine other circles of twelve each, having both men and womenñtotaling altogether one hundred twenty, plus two women disciples in His intimate circle comes to one hundred twenty-two. During the lifetime or after the Avatar relinquishes His body, all twelve men disciples with the appendage of two women disciples, receive God Realization. All other remaining members of the nine circles of twelve each do not receive God Realization, but all are interrelated from previous contacts with each other in many previous lifetimes. And only when the second circle moves up to the first circle (intimate circle) in a future Avataric Advent, will they be candidates for God Realization. 
Only the intimate circle of the first twelve men are the authentic, authoratative Apostles of the Avatar. Implicit in the term intimate Mandali is the function of Apostleship. 
Answer to question 3: 
The Society for Avatar Meher Baba does its work in the gross or physical world promulgating and propagating Avatar Meher Baba's Message of Love and Truth. The astral plane which lies between the gross and the first plane of the subtle world is the "hobgoblin" world which should be avoided by a sincere seeker after Truth. Meher Baba states emphatically that the search for Truth which will terminate in Self Realization should be the Path of Love and only love and selfless service in His nameñand not to pursue after gimmicks, rabbit's foot and horseshoe superstitions, or seemingly comfortable gadgetry supplied by the astral world or sidetracking "experiences" which are powerful tools of maya and almost insuperable obstacles to progress on the Path of Love. 
Only the Avatar eternally in His Creation is everywhere and in everything as Omnipotence, Omniscience and Omnipresence and every sincere aspirant in his heart and through love can deal directly with the Avatar in His formless state. You contact Him wherever you are in this gross or physical world. The astral world is replete with all manner of innumerable discarnate souls or entities, who, not having bodies to work off or spend theirimpressions, have to find and possess physical bodies in the gross world to work off these impressions irrespective of whether they're good or bad impressions. Therefore if your business is with God, and God alone, seek Him and none other where He is. And He is in you in your heart, as Soul, though asleep, waiting to be awakened by your continuous and burning remembrance of Him as your Real Beloved. 
Answer to question 4: 
Avatar Meher Baba is the Personification of Almighty God who out of compassion and Love for His Creation manifested Himself amongst men in the "unreal" form of a human being so that they could partake of His Love and Care and His full involvement in their ignorance was to awaken their hearts to the realization that they are not to live in the prison of maya (illusion,) but to seek and acquire Freedom in God's Ocean of Divine Love even as He, the Avatar, experiences His Infinite State. Meher Baba left His physical form (His unreal form) January 31, 1969 in Meherazad near Ahmednagar, India to assume His Real formless state of being everywhere and in everything. When you give complete and total attention to Meher Baba, should it be completely sincere, He will give full and complete attention to you. This can be done by saying His name audibly or silently, continually throughout the day,reciting the Avatar's Prayer, which commences with "Oh Parvardigar the Preserver and Protector of all." 
Sincerely, Tom Mauro