

Notes from My Diary 

F. H. DADACHANJI 
THE NEW CENTRE effective and modern method to 
APART from the special work which Meher Baba carries on privately with the God-mad in the mast-ashram, where even his own mandali has little access except when called for special duty, the other activity through which he is known to the world outside here is his Universal Spiritual Centre, for which he came over to this side and the foundation of which he laid with his own august hands last month. 
"No Prophet was ever known in His own Time and in His own Place." 
Meher Baba lives in a modern age and his external work through the Centre, which has a world≠wide scope, must necessarily be done in modern ways, if it has to invite and appeal to the intelli≠gentsia of our modern times and the masses. And unless the object and ideals of this great institution are known, how could the people be interested? The only 
make the project known to the world is publicity. But surpris≠ingly enough this very word appears like a ìred-rag" to so many who feel shocked and question, ìA Master . . . and publicity? How absurd!î Of the many and varied whims and weaknesses of the human mind, even amongst those spiritually-inclined, are there very vague ideas about Saints and Masters and their lives and workings of which they know so little yet claim so much. 
Most of these Saints and Masters do indeed prefer seclu≠sion and even obscurity from public gaze and contact. It is the true aspirant and seeker who goes out in search of them for advice and guidance. But there have also been Saints and Masters who have openly come out into the world, preached in the market≠places, gathered crowds around them and have created mass appeals 

through such external contacts. In fact, the ascetic type of Saints and Masters have very little to do with the outside world, their work being mainly internal; hence their preference to retirement in seclusion and quietude. But there are a few of these who have a great mission and have come for the upliftment of mankind every≠where. They have much to do with the world outside at one time or the other of their life and must necessarily be available to all, and even mingle amongst them. It all depends upon the nature of their work and mission at different times, places and circumstances. To give glaring instances of a few of these world-teachersóChirst, Krishna, Buddha, Mohamed, Zoroasteróhow could mankind have ever had the great religions and messages from God, had those Avatars not come out freely and openly, avoided mass contact and preferred seclusion in caves or mountains? They had to do both at different times according to the needs and conditions of mankind, certain periods of their lives being spent in retirement in caves or moun- 
tains and later, when exigencies demanded, greater parts of their lives spent with and amidst the masses whom they had to awaken to spiritual consciousness. Invar≠iably, however, these unfath≠omable Beings who were apparently human but really Divine, were misunderstood, molested, even agonised and murdered. "No Prophet was ever known in his own times or in his own place." Yet in the teeth of a world of opposition and even when ridiculed, stoned, cruelly beaten and persecuted, and mostly from their own people, these great Avatars persevered preaching both in private and in market-places. If these personal contacts and lectures in public were found necessary in olden times, when publicity as such was practically unknown, a Master who has to work in this civilized age when publicity forms one of the most essential factors to bring into light any new project, must necessarily resort to means which bring him and his work in the know of the public and help him open the way to contact those who need him. 

PREPARATIONS FOR THE FOUNDATION-DAY FUNCTION To focus the attention of the public on Baba's activity before the people on this side, no occasion would have been more appropriate and welcome than the laying of the Foundation of this great Spiritual Centre. It was for the first time that Baba's work through this institution was to be made publicly known. To make the function of laying the Founda≠tion of this great Centre a success, his group had to work very hard for over a month and with the most appreciable spirit of whole≠hearted cooperation from all sides. But even with the best of intentions and spirit of cooper≠ation, there were great practical difficulties in this undertaking here. The site of Byramangala where the Centre is to be established is rather a remote spot near a village, 3 miles from a small town and railway station of Bidadi. Except for the gang of labourers and other staff working there for the Mysore Government irrigation reservoir now under construction, there is no other public activity. To invite people 
from Bangalore, Mysore and other places in the State, miles away, for a public gathering and to make elaborate arrangements for a public function under such conditions, was indeed a task that demanded most careful consi≠deration of the various practical details to be worked out. 
The principal question was of transport of men and material to this distance of 22 miles from Bangalore proper, from where everything necessary for such a large gathering of several thousands had to be carried in cars and buses. For visitors invited and others desirous to participate in the function, it was decided to run buses direct from different centres in Bangalore City and Canton≠ment to Byramangala and return to the respective centres with same passengers. 
GREAT PUBLIC INTEREST AND ENTHUSIASTIC RESPONSE 
Before this arrangement for free bus service was placed in public, there was such a demand for the seats that 500 passes were distributed within 3 days and further accommodation for 

an equal number had to be immediately arranged. This was managed, though with difficulty, as the number of buses available was limited. Yet even this could not suffice and hundreds of people had to be refused. Had there been proper transport arrangement from Bidadi station to Byramangala site of the Centre, special trains would have been surely arranged and thousands would have attended. 
However, in spite of these transport difficulties, over a thousand came by buses while an equal number came by private cars. Besides, crowds from Byraman≠gala and other surrounding villages numbered over two thousand, comprised of people of all walks of life and creeds from the State. The distinguished Dewan of Mysore and also his subordinate Govern≠ment officials were present. This cosmopolitan gathering of over 4,000 of the elite and cultured element in and around Bangalore together with the poorest peasants and villagers, wonderfully harmon≠ised with the great aim and ideal of this Centre from the very outsetó to bring about a spiritual unity and brotherhood of humanityówith people of all shades, opinion, culture and nationalities collected for one supreme aim in lifeóSelf-Realization. 
A MEMORABLE DAY 
Sunday, the 17th December 1939, may be said to be a memorable day for Meher Babaís group in that it saw the inauguration of an institution which is designed to embrace the external aspect of one of the greatest public mediums of his workóa unique institution which is to be the centre focus of all his external activities for the spread of his sacred Cause. For the Mysore-ans, it was the foundation day of another ideal scheme of inter≠national importance that would add one more jewel to the others that already shine in its crown of cultural and artistic developments in their Model State. 
From 2 O'clock in the afternoon, crowds began to rush towards the different centres in Bangalore from where the buses were to start. By 2-30 all the buses were quite packed up, ready to move. A regular fleet of about fifty buses, specially reserved for the 

occasion and having placards of the Meher Baba Universal Spirit≠ual Centre at Byramangala moved out of Bangalore towards the Mysore Road which, with dozens of other private cars all full of visitors vending their way towards Byramangala from Bangalore that afternoon, was a sight to see. 
With a large gathering of several thousand, the little quiet village of Byramangala was buzzing that afternoon with life and animationóa prelude to the immense activities and movements that the place will have in future to witness. It was like jungle me mangal. 
DESCRIPTION OF 
THE FOUNDATION DAY 
FUNCTION 
By an Observer 
The Foundation-laying cere≠mony of the Universal Spiritual Centre was performed by Meher Baba in the presence of the Dewan, Sir Mirza Ismail, and the elite of Mysore State, both officials and civilians, on Sunday, the 17th December 1939. 
In spite of a distance of about 22 miles from Bangalore the function was a huge success as about 4,000 people were in attendance. They were all accom≠modated in specially erected pandal and shamiana which were artistically arranged in a circular arena with Meher Baba's seat in the centre and the Dewan and afficials facing him. For such a huge gathering to be accom≠modated and controlled without any hitch much of the credit goes to the efficient co-operation of the officials and the police. 
The programme for the even- ing commenced at 4-30 p.m. with the arrival of Meher Baba who was immediately escorted by his discilpes to his seat. In the meanwhile, the gathering was being entertained by a Kirtan party and village band. No sooner Sir Mirza Ismail the Dewan arrived and occupied his seat accompanied by the officials of the State, Meher Baba was garlanded and the customary boquet was presented to the Dewan. This set the whole programme arranged for the afternoon into motion. 
A poetical composition welcom≠ing Meher Baba was read out in Persian by the Author, Mr. A. K. Syed Rasul (Arif), a retired head≠master in a Municipal school. This was 

followed by a speech from Mr. C. 
V. Sampath Aiyangar (Retired Sub-Judge, Madras Judicial Service) who recounted the circumstances of his contact with the Master and his conviction that it is Meher Baba who is destined to give the Message of Love and Peace to the worried world. After this, he requested the Master to lay the Foundation. 
Meher Baba walked over to the Foundation seat and seating himself on the beautiful stone-piece, with the shovel specially prepared of seven metals and provided on the occasion, upturned the earth at a spot where the Foundation seat will be embedded in the masonry. When Baba resumed his seat on the dais, his special Message, prepared for the occasion, was read out in English and translated into Kannada. Eloquent speeches were then delivered. Mrs. V. T. Lakshmi, M.A., L.T., F.R.ECON.S., M.R.A.S., Provincial Woman Welfare Worker and Superin≠tendent, Central Rescue Home of Madras, recounted the circum≠stances of her contact with Shri Meher Baba and the resultant reaction, feelings and experiences connected therewith.   This was followed by another speech by Acharya M. Chakravarthy, M.A. (HONS.), the great exponent of Vedanta, who explained and welcomed Meher Babaís Centre Scheme to the Mysoreans. 
After the function, a regular rush was made by the disciples and devotees, who had arrived in quite a good number from the Bombay Presidency, to possess a handful of earth that was touched by Meher Baba with his shovel. After the function was declared closed, the guests were requested to move over to partake of light refreshments provided in the spacious grounds nearby. At 6-30 
p.m. the guests began to disperse. 
The Message of Shri Meher Baba has already appeared in our last issue. The speeches by the three speakers of the day are published elsewhere in this issue. 
THE MASTER SEES PEOPLE 
Ever since his arrival in Bangalore, Meher Baba has given interviews to very few earnest aspirants who sought his advice and guidance in matters spiritual. The desire however for these interviews 

grew very keen in many who wanted to have a personal contact with the Master and through that earn his Grace, and enlightenment on many a problem in life both material and spiritual. These inter≠views were kept pending until after the foundation-day due to the Master's time being fully occupied in the preparation for the Centre Scheme with its multifarious details. 
This request of the public and the demand for interviews for enlightenment and guidance by many a true seeker on this side of India were duly responded to and personal meetings and interviews were allowed from the 18th of December onwards. During the two hours of the day specially fixed for these, crowds came in daily for the Master's darshana and interviews and went on in≠creasing in number day after day till the end of December. 
There were some real and genuine seekers and aspirants amongst these crowds who truly needed the Master's spiritual help which he lovingly gave during many heart-to-heart talks. It is indeed a privilege to watch this divine game of give-and-take and  the subtle and significant exchanges of loving glances and expressions with the depth of feeling aroused in the lovers for the Divine Beloved. Many interes- ting talks on spiritual subjects also ensued and number of questions were answered by the Master which throw much light on the Path and some of the important subjects that deal with life here and hereafter. Our readers may rest assured of some interesting readings derived from these talks in our future issues as time and space permit. Meher Baba also gave private instruction for spiritual meditation to certain indi≠viduals who sought and needed these. 
What impression those who thus met him gathered, is a matter of individual inclination, tempera≠ment, and tendency. It is for him as a Master to give, it is for the others to receive, retain and realize. 
* * * 
As Baba wanted to go out of Bangalore for his work in South India during January, these interviews were postponed till his return by the end of the month. He may give darshana and interviews to the public again from the 1st of February. 

* * * 
In this age of logic and reasoning, everyone wishes to argue. This attitude of going into the pros and cons of Saints and Masters, so far as it aims at finding the Truth, is appreciable and quite welcome. But with hundreds of people, with their peculiar whims and weaknesses even for the highest of ideals they cherish, to enter into arguments on intellectual basis for subjects beyond intellect would be futile and endless. After all spiritual understanding is something much deeper than mere intellectual grasp of things which remain only on the surface. It is much a matter of feeling and inner experience rather than outer expressions in words or explanations. In fact, the Path of spirituality is one of devotion rather than discussion. With this fundamental difference and diametrically opposite view≠point at the very outset, it is so difficult to enter into arguments on any subject. These extend to leng≠thy talks and discussion into details that are as worthless as endless, with conflicting ideas and ideals of a modern mind  which is,   in sooth, much of a store-house of information rather than a reservoir for things substantial and a medium of true understanding. None knows this better than Saints and Masters who have dived much deeper into the realms of true knowledge of life ever-Iasting and who know things as they are and not as they appear. This is one of the very many reasons why Masters and Saints prefer seclu≠sion and avoid public contacts to be away from curiosity-seekers and parrot-pandits. They are how≠ever never reluctant to guide and help true seekers. Rather they want such sincere souls who have nothing to ask for themselves nor for their family and friends of the world, but who cherish a desire to be enlightened on the Path Divine and helped and guided in their efforts for the attainment of spiritual Truth and Union with God. But such are ever so fewó hardly one in a thousandóas the Masters know and say. 
It could therefore be easily imagined how difficult it is for Masters of Spiritual Perfection to explain and passify thousands. who approach them with one difficulty or the other, almost 

all of earthly nature. Those who have witnessed such instances of crowds coming to the Master with all sorts of material cravings, desires and wants, and how lovingly he has met all, passified and blessed them, have really wondered what suffering it must be to him to come down to the Mayawik plane again and satisfy the ignorant souls still struggling for existence in pursuit of Mayawik pleasures. Apart from the Masts and other true aspirants, Baba has seen thousands of these really struggling for material existence in this life and has helped so many to overcome their difficulties, and with his timely advice, guidance and bles≠sings consoled their bleeding hearts. He will be glad to see all who truly seek and need his Grace and guidance, for that is his Divine Mission of Love in life. 
THE MASTER'S WORK WITH THE GOD-MAD 
Ever since the establishment of the special Ashram for the God-mad at Rahuri (in Ahmednagar District in 1936) Baba's work with these masts has been continued, even though the Ashram itself has shifted twice, from Rahuri to Meherabad near Ahmednagar in 1938, and from Meherabad to Bangalore recently. Over a hundred of these God- mad have come and gone, after having the Master's personal contact, some for days, some for months. Some Baba has retained. He has said that eventually he will have one of every type and that they be used as mediums in their particular sphere for his Universal Work. 
Even after coming to Banga≠lore a number of new masts have been contacted locally from around Bangalore and also brought over from other places in South Indiaófrom Madras, Mysore, Mangalore, Belgaum. Some were given bath, some food and clothing and sent away, whereas a few rare types are still kept near him. Two of these are very highly advanced souls and have reached the sixth plane of Spiritual consciousness which places them in the category of Saints, who are actually wor≠shipped as such in their own places where they have large followings. They are however apparently indifferent to their own selves, and oblivious to their surroundings and to the world in general. 

Who but those that have faith and understanding or an open receptive heart to feel or have eyes that see can appreciate this divine drama enacted in a quiet corner of his abode? In this simple spiritual nursing home are nourished and treated some of the rare souls who are spiritually-dazed and stranded somewhere in the higher planes. They are discovered and brought over to the Master to be in his personal loving care and treatment. Here in the unique spiritual laboratory, the world's truest servants and benefactors as the future torch-bearers of mankind in the spiritual realm are in the process of preparation under the personal care, training and guidance of a Perfect Being, whose special mission in life is to make others perfect and divinely conscious of their real Self, as he himslef is. He, as the greatest servant of humanity, works so selflessly, silently and without a word of mouth, to help humanity in their struggle of existence, in every phase of life, unperturbed even by those who refuse to under≠stand or misunderstand, blessing equally all who come to meet him, for the infinite love he has and wishes to impart to all. 
To the mandali staying with the Master and who have seen him work with these masts all these years. it is a daily occurrence and an object lesson in real, loving selfless service; to others who have had the privilege to see him work during the last few days, it is a sight unforgettable, an experience inexplicable, in different degrees of their understanding, as they have themselves given out unasked. 
To write a detailed history of all this sublime work would form a volume in itself, and highly interesting too as evinced from the splendid details gathered. That will be done in due course. Meanwhile this passing reference in general will suffice just to give our readers and others who want to know of Meher Baba's daily routine work and chief activities at the moment, that this particular phase of his activities has a special significance and a great bearing on his future work through those of the God-mad who have already contacted the Master and passed out of this Ashram, as well as those who have still 

been kept with him, and to whose service he devotes some four to six hours a day, regularly, and with clock-wise precision, in spite of the pressure of other works that demand his attention. 
This subtle process of the Masterís working in this laboratory for the training and preparation of the masts may sound and seem quite unintelligible to our human intellect. But the significant utterances and expressions of these lovers of God, spontaneously given out from time to time, as also the marvellous changes we witness in their consciousness, give us as casual observers, some idea or hint as to the trend of the Masterís working with and through them, individually and collectively, which is otherwise impossible for outsiders to grasp. Besides Babaís own passing references and explanations given at times also help us to understand something, if not much, of the amazing changes and adjustments that he works out in them in this spiritual laboratory of the present-day living saints whom an ignorant world has regarded as crazy or mad and mercilessly thrown out. 
These amazing references and significant words of Baba are too difficult for the world now to grasp, but they will certainly be divulged at the proper time by the Master himselfóand then the world will know. 
It might be explained at this juncture that from all apparent signs and indications, the Byramangala Centre Scheme now taking practical shape, touches the external aspect of Meher Babaís activities for the world outside, whereas his work in the personal treatment and contact with the masts indicate the internal aspect of his workóa process of preparing his great mediums for his future work. 
