The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern 
India and their Hagiology.* 


THE LIFE OF ST. TONDARóADIóPPODI AZHVAR 

(ORIGINAL NAMEóVIPRA NARAYAN) BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 

The path of loving devotion secured by Juana and Karma, which is the burden of Vedanta teaching as taught by Visishtadvaitins,Ü is best illustrated by the life of our Saint Vipra Narayan. That also shows how one suffers when he forgets his kinship to God, and how he enjoys his life when he is recog≠nized. God is in us and we should not forget Him. As Dr. F. W. Faber so beautifully said : "God possessed, our own God, that is Creation 's Home, that our Last End, there only is our rest. O that the winds of Grace would blow that we might sail more swiftly over this broad sea to our Eternal Home! Another day is gone, another week is passed, another year is toldóBlessed be God then, we are nearer to the end. It comes swiftly; yet it comes slowly too. Come it must, and then it will all be but a dream to look back upon." 

Our Saint was born in Southern India, at Mandangudi (in 2 Chola Country).ß The month Margasirsha (December-January) is consecrated to Lord Shree Krishna, and it was in this month that he was born in a Brahmin family. Even in his youth he learnt all the sacred lore, the four Vedas, the six Angas and the other sciences useful for successfully living this mundane life. But, in the language of Thomas A. Kempis, he said to himself addressing Him, "Most beloved spouse of my Soul, supreme source of Light and Love, and sovereign Lord of Universal Nature! When shall I lose in the Love of Thee, all perception of myself, and have no sense of any being but Thine? " He went on a visit to Sriranga, 


the sacred town which is between the two branches of the river Kaveri, and settled there in the temple of Shri Ranganatha, the Lord Resident of the place. There he spent his time in divine contemplation, concentrating his mind on the Divine Beauty of the One cause of everything. Everyday he used to prepare a floral wreath with eight select species of flowers, and offer it to Him who is the Lord of all beings. The esoteric meaning of this very interes≠ting fact is this: It was typical of the chief eight kinds of mental worship and service to mankind. They are: 

1. Non-injury (Ahimsa), 2. Conquest of the senses (Indriya Nigrah), 3. Kindness to all creatures (Sarva bhuta daya), 4. Forgiveness (Kshama), 5. Prayer (Dhyana), 6. Austerity (Tapas), 

7. Mental culture (Jnana), 8. Truth (Satyam). Worship with these flowers is the real communion with God. That joy with God is really above all other joys. It was in such a state of ecstatic bliss that Saint Nammazhvar exclaimed that he seemed to be all in all in the Almighty's creation which contained heaven and hell. To a person who enjoys such a bliss, says the commen≠tator, heaven and hell make no difference. 

Our Saint was called Tondak Adipodi (meaning the dust of the feet of the slaves of God). He loved humanity and worked for their salvation. And to him all things reminded of God. 

The great Saint Nammazhvar wrote on the days and nights of the soul of vicissitudes in spiritual life. Referring to this Thomas A. Kempis says, "This vicissitude of day and night in the spiritual life is neither new nor unexpected to those who are acquainted with the ways of God; for the ancient prophets and the most eminent saints have all experienced an alternative of visitation and desertion. " As an instance of this, the royal prophet describes his own case. "When I was in prosperity," says he, "and my heart was filled with the treasures of grace, I said I should never be moved." But these treasures being soon taken away and feeling in himself the poverty of fallen nature he adds: "Thou didst turn Thy face from me and I was troubled." Yet in this disconsolate state he does 





 

not despair, but with more ardour raises his desire and prays to God: "Unto Thee, O, Lord, will I cry, and I will make my supplication unto my God. " Our Saint had his own vicissitude of day and night in his spiritual life. When his love to Him departed, a chaos wide and vast and dark as hell was opened in him. But when the departed love re≠turned, the gloomy scene was past and he saw the One God Supreme above all others. This is the incident in his life to which I refer. 

In the town of Tiru-Kkarambanur there lived one Devadevi, a courtesan of matchless beauty. She was con≠nected with the Court of the King Chola, whose capital was Uraiyur. She, on her way home, halted in the flower garden of our Saint. She, with her maids, was taking rest under a shady tree. A thousand trees there were of various kinds. Beautiful birds of var≠ious colours were singing their rap≠turous songs. This beautiful garden was a veritable garden of Eden, and there amidst the music of the spheres rested the young damsel. She saw our Saint working in the parterres. He was watering the plants and collecting flowers. The damsel saw him, but his mind was concentrated in his work. Devadevi and her maid wondered why he did not see them at least once. How could he be so indifferent to their fascinating charm? The maid said that he was wholly absorbed in divine service, and was, therefore, indifferent to what took place around him. She then said that Devadevi could not capti≠vate him, but the latter swore that she would. So saying she removed all her jewels and sent them home through her maids. She then went and stood before our Saint. Then she prostrated before him. The Saint saw her and asked her who she was. She said that she was leading a vicious life, and that she came to him for redemption and salvation. She agreed to work in the garden and help him in all possible ways. She worked under him, and he shared his frugal fare with her. Some days passed. and one day she was allowed to shampoo his weary limbs. He then became a slave to her furtive glances. and fell. 

"Ah! how I have virtue 

forsworn! 

Her anklets gingling, me 

unnerved! 

Oh! how her eyes so wide 

and dark 

Has witching spelled my 

Saintly Soul!" 

The God 's garden became Cupid 's parterres! The wily strumpet stripped Vipra Narayan of all his worldly goods and left him helpless. He ran after her and submitted himself to all the indign≠ities of an unscrupulous harlot. He was lying helpless at her door side. He then thought of Him: And it was truly said that it is the only sovereign remedy for all ills. King Chola had a dream about our Vipra. He was told that the latter had suffered at the hands of Devadevi on account of his past deeds, and that the end of justice was satisfied. When the king met Vipra the next day and told him about the dream, old recol≠lections came to our Saint, and there he stood regenerate. So far as Devadevi was concerned her association with the Saint completely reformed her. She also became a new being. In his beautiful devotional hymn Tiru-malai, the Saint sings : 

"Whom dare we fear now? 

So panoplied are we 

With His All-holy name, 

E'en death from our door 

Oh, ousted, headlong flies."

 It teaches that the soul must always work subject to the will of God. In his second work, Tirup-palli-Yezhucchi (Waking of the Lord), he teaches that the only way to salvation is disinter≠ested service. For 105 years he lived in the sacred town of Shrirangam, preach≠ing what he felt and saw of God. 



To be continued) 
