

Shri Meher Bada and Healing* 

BY COUNTESS NADINE TOLSTOY 

For most of Shri Meher Baba's followers who never before had the experience of work in conditions of this kind in the Free Hospital for the poor, this test was offering most suitable opportunity for ego elimination. First disguised under the responsibilities given to workers, soon the inner signi≠ficance, the real spiritual performance of the roles was revealed. It soon unfolded into a real climax when the egos began to express themselves and assert their ways and peculiarities. Then the real surgical 'operation' of the egos by the sacred loving hands of the greatest 'surgeon' in the world, Shri Meher Baba, revealed indeed to all the true spiritual significance of the exper≠ience. The real cure is obvious and really enjoyed after the painful moment was well-faced and accepted. This acceptance and obedient response in following the inner and outer orders of the Master is the sign of readiness and real co-operation with His spiritual work. In this process of liberation from the ego the openness and surrender of the disciple become a real achievement on his part and lead to immediate spiritual benefit.

 "Hide nothing from me."

 "Bring me all your weaknesses, give them all to me, only give. I will make you free, unbound and happy." 

Always unceasingly vigilant, watch≠ing, knowing everything what is going on within us, knowing our thoughts, subconscious inclinations and feelings Baba knows all our difficulties and inner conflicts. Subtly He guides us out of inner turmoil into serenity and greater harmony of being, out of resis≠tance of the ego into completeness of surrender, He gradually breaks up all the former complexes of the mind; having undone them one by one, He subtly utilizes and redirects the released energies into new channels. Adjusted and again readjusted, one is infinitely helped in experiencing an ever renewed 


higher state of spiritual well being. 

The Masteróthe Infinite Creative Sourceócreates conditions of real strength and balance, operating deep and sure in full knowledge of all processes, on all planes and forms of creation. 

But as said before, the openness and the ease of response on the side of the follower are the necessary conditions and advantages for the disciple on the Path. The greater the love and sur≠render, the deeper are the effects of the Master's blessings on us. The deeper the resistance of the inner unconscious being, the stronger the holding back of the ego-defence eager to follow its old instinctive tracts, reactions and claims óthe less the spiritual benefit of the unique opportunity which could be fully utilized for spiritual advancement. And it is Divine Love of the Master which alone can win the devotion and surrender of the devotees, so indispen≠sable in the elimination of the ego. Love alone can provide the alert plasticity and spontaneous response to the Master's inner orders. 

One and the same task and purpose, one and the same end has to be ac≠complished through successions of lives by each human being on earth: the rich and the poor, the sick and the so-called healthy, the fortunate and the miserable are equal before this imma≠nent law of God to man. 

Shri Meher Baba has made clear the main points concerning man's make-up and its corresponding planes of being. He has given a definite understanding of the goal of life and the individual problem of each human being. 

The over-estimation of physical, material and mental values and comforts, so connected with the ego, leads to great misinterpretation of real spirituality. The pure spiritual tradition warns against the abuse and misuse of spiritual force, its commands not to be used for any selfish purposes or physi≠cal and psychic cravings or phenomena. In his writings, Shri Meher Baba has given points in regard to miracles of physical healing: true Spiritual Masters never perform them for idle curiosity and selfish purposes; even lesser teachers can do them and they are not the sign of real spirituality. 





 

In the time of manifestation of the Avatar and of the Masters in the world, they sometimes perform the miracles for spiritual reasons. 

Only spiritual healing is real healing. 

Only spiritual awakening helps to overcome all human ailments whatever they may be. The problem of healing lies beyond and above the physical plane with its psychic shadow and entanglements of the mind. Imperfect as they are, men live an imperfect existence. The unexpressed and unful≠filled state of being is bound to lack the experience of fullness of being and its true happiness. The crystallization within the limits of the personal ego gives no room for expansion. The incomplete man lives an incomplete life. Out of balance and proportion, men suffer restlessness, inner discord and misery; the ignorant misuse of energies creates ruptures in unity of being, throwing one out of balance in mental agony, physical pain or psychic entanglements and abnormalities. 

The heart of man degenerated and tarried in the unhappy, selfish existence shrinks to its little world incapable of great expansions and joys of the awakened pure experience of 1ove. So men live as gloomy shadows, as distorted false images of primal per≠fection. 

The real service of a true Master consists in giving to humanity the new impulse of spiritual growth. Knowing the path of life He helps to speed the process of involution of consciousness which is a conscious return to the primal source of the higher Self. There alone permanent happiness and union are found. In Baba we have the true Knower, the Supreme Compassionate Authority of the age. His Love and Wisdom give best; for they give real everlasting cure to men. He came to set them free from the traps of egoism, from the cause of all suffering and trouble. 

Elimination of the ego through Love, is the goal and method of Shri Meher Baba's guidance for reaching into the roots of Being.

 "Love is the remedy," says Baba. His grace gives an everlasting relief from ignorance 



with all its disastrous consequences. 

His Grace will lead those who "seek and need" to spiritual Realization and Truth.

 We shall remember the inspiring words of the Master: 

"Serve Him who serves the whole universe; obey Him who commands the whole creation; love Him who is Love itself; follow Him in every walk of life." 