

Intimate	Talks	of	the	Master
BY  PRINCESS  NORINA MATCHABELLI

 
SHRI MEHER BABA states in mystical language: "The defini- tion of reaction in mind as Use in any Experience is real and true when it is in Self. All else is untrue, unreal. Any one who is in Being reactive to I Impersonal is Use of Me direct. The direct Use of Me in I impersonal is Me. So is the experience and so is the act in reaction in I individual. More is absolutely unnecessary to say as  in Use in I is all an order imperson- al that in I individual is the Self in will. The Self in aim and the Self in longing is absolute realizing order imperative for I as One as Truth as God.
 
I here design the disciple to absolute realizing reaction. I here design	the	disciple	to	real experience in I Impersonal; then I, as use One in use Two, as the Duo-reaction in mind, create the Truth as One in I order to realize  in use One. It is to super-react in I Individual. It is to super-react in I as use dual the real Use that is to realize in I Impersonal. When I here as Descended Expansion in I, as Use One, as Truth Realized Human Being, do the realizing reaction it is to use in Use in I, as Individual—the Self.
The Self is Use of Me direct the Truth  Impersonal  in  use  in  'I in Use'. All in the     Impersonal
 

 
I is Use of Me. So is the Act of War. War is Truth Order to realize the Absolute in mind in Being. It is to make the Individual I real and true, real and good in Being in I Indivisible in Use. This is to say, when I as Use in I, as Use One, throw-in in I the Pure Element of Life as realized state in Being that is Love—it is realizing in Use in I, the 'One in I Use' that  is One-All-Realizing-Reaction. This is the One-in-I-Life as Use in thought impersonal. It is the I-order impersonal in mind in Being as Self as Universal Con- science. It is all as I, the One—I as Use. This is to say, it is the Universal Use in I, as the Impersonal Portion in use in I individual.
To realize the I, one has to realize the realizing order in Use. This	is	what	all	of		you misinterpret. You have no free Use in Being. It is Me. You have no free Use in I Impersonal, it is I— as One as Use who is the One-in-I-Use-One. You have no Use	imperative		in		I		as Conscience. It is I, who  is  the real wonder-order Impersonal in Being. See it. Realize in this and be in it indifferent and in real quiet acting reaction. I  as  Use, am the Use in I Impersonal. To live for Me is Use impersonal of I Individual. To live for Me is Use—One in I as Use Individual. All I here real and true show im-
 
perative in realizing reaction is to give, to real and true show, impersonal real reaction in Use, in all. So be, grow, and do. Real and One in I as Use impersonal, real as reaction in Use, do Me the favour to realize in I Impersonal, Me, and no more you. See this as Whole in I. See this as One in I. See this as Two in One. As pure realization impersonal in I individual for Use of I imperative, as One as I as Me the Man as God. It is pure wisdom of I Impersonal  that here is speaking. See Me real and good give to all the Real One-in-I Resurrection.
It is to find in you in I im- personal the Real One, the  Real
I. It is to conscious, real  and One show, impersonal in Use, the Real I in you individual. I here know in mind in man what is the mind as Use impersonal. I here sow-in in Use One in I, as pure portion impersonal—the real One-in-I-Use that is I—I One-I Pure. I Real is I divine.
I ask you to show Me in Use in you—the Real I. It is to be selfless, unassuming, real, simple, natural, unself-reactive,. unself-conscious. It is to be indivisible in Being in longing. It is to live for use of I—in all. It  is to create non-resistance in I Impersonal to react in I individual for Use of Me. It is to live for them who owe Me. To live in the One-in-I of any
 


 
one in Being, in I Impersonal in use of them, as I as One as mind is as Individual. It is to live for Me as human creature. To live in Me in being in Love with all and any—as in all in any is I—the Truth.
So it is superfluous to create the Self Impersonal in mind, as it is in mind impersonal when I imper- sonal, is No-use of Thought.
I am in time in space the I Impersonal. I am in life in mind the I Imperative as I as One. I  am in Me as Individual the realizing order to realize the I in One. This be sure of.
Here as the Manifestation in I—as Me One—as Two in One, I as Use Impersonal, create the Self, the dual I, the One-in-I as Self Impersonal as Use Im- personal Imperative in I Indi- vidual. See this as Oneness Wonder in Use. See this as Use in I impersonal and see the One-in- I indivisible in it, be you.
Order in Me in Use of Me is rare. Life as Use general is Use of Me indirect. This is fact. I here real and One do Me as Use One, create Me as Use Real. Realize in Use of Me unself-conscious of I Impersonal, unself-reactive in I Impersonal, real in Use imperative in I Individual. I am Dictator of I in Use of One as Me. I—is Use.
Remember now the Use as a past condition. See in duo-
 
reaction the position in realizing the I indivisible and One-in-I as One-all-Use in I. The I Divine  is all the show impersonal. Oneness is design impersonal in Use indivisible in One Im- personal. As individual expan- sion impersonal in Being is I— the Realized State Real. This is Use of I. Use of One. Use of Truth. One-All-I is Me the Descended Realized I. See it. Realize in it you as human creation. See, be, react, do. Realize, give, do, bring-in in Use in I Impersonal—Me. This be and realize. This see and realize. This react in thought and under- stand. This know: Impersonal, Imperative in I Impersonal is Me.
Use One-in-I as you the Por- tion Imperative, is I. I as One as I—am you Impersonal. This real Experience I do realize in all, here now, is to awaken the Impersonal I. This is to realize in mind in man the Divine I. It is Portion in I Impersonal that in Use One has to pursue within I indivisible as One as the Portion in I impersonal—the Real I. This is good and pure life to be practised. It is good and pure expansion imperative in Use imperative as Use—One. This manifestation impersonal in I as Use individual is to real and true show imperative in use—the life. It is still to be realized in I individual. It is to create new impersonal I- State  in  mind as
 

 
I-intellect. It is still to be One-in- I as Use Real. It is in a few cases Me in Being, creating in Use One for Use imperative. This is too high to realize for Use general. The Use general is indirect Use. The Use One is pure use impersonal in doing in I as Use of Truth. This I here, have to pursue and realize in Use of War. War real and true has to create in Use imperative the Transmutation in I as Use One. So I have to pursue the I Imper- sonal in I individual to create new conscious Winning Order impersonal in mind in man.
Life was impersonal in intel- lect and impersonal in Use in I as Use Real till it was superficial reaction. Now it is imperative One-in-I Use, as I Imperative.  I  am the Life—the Way—the realizing show imperative in Use, to use the I for Use One. This has to be expe- rienced.
The realizing experience in I individual is suffering. It is self- imposed real good Way  to expiate in I individual, the One, the I Impersonal.
The I, One in Use in all, is within, impersonal in suffering. This is to say that, One in I as pure I, as One-Use-in All, is Self in realizing state and as such it  is divine. It is still, it is reaction- less.
In duo-expansion in I is all Use. Use is suffering. Thinking, doing, undoing reaction imper- sonal is Being in suffering.
 
Realizing in mind in I in conscious realizing reaction is pain impersonal. All is realizing in Use impersonal—the Real I. This is to suffer for Use of Me. Impersonal indirect in Use is I,  in One in I as pure order Impersonal in the show impersonal—I, as Portion of I. Universal, is Me the winning urge to succumb to I as use One. I do the life-long urge to create in man the new awake state in mind impersonal. I am in I as Use One—the One-in-I Use that is Use for use.
No More Use, is state im- personal as Realized State. This see, know real and true realize. This, know, see, do realize and react. It is Impersonal Realiz- ation in I that what I here use in mind in man. So be, realize, do in I impersonal no reaction effort as in mind impersonal is Me the Use Impersonal for Use of Me direct."
For Use of One-in-I is He the Exponent of I.  This  we  as Him in Resignation of us in all,  see and real and true experience. We experience the false I as Use imperative as duo-order im- perative as Self as I impersonal. We experience in  us—Him  be the Use One. We realize in us  Him Use Two-in-One. We know, see, find in Use in us—Him as One-Use, as I-Act Imperative. This we as Him in Use, sow-in in design of I individual that is impersonal.
 

 
This we real and true realize in Use One as I as individual when we realize in us One as I Imperative in I impersonal. This experience we see, know, find in us at any age in development on the spiritual Way. It is Self in Use making in us new design to awake. It is antidote to I individual. It is Self-Use imper- sonal of us.
Order in us imperative, is, to real and one, real and pure—  know Him.
When He is alive in Use in us as mind, alive in Use in us as form, impersonal in I individual, we see more, we realize deeper the Truth. We do no more  realize for Use One as us the pure Self as Portion—but, we real and One, do win in I impersonal our whole One as I as Use of Him. Shri Meher Baba as real Order Imperative in us in I individual is our I, us in I; our One in I—the pure Portion that is in Use, One Self—Impertive Use.
We must see the  difference.  As Radiant Order imperative in us, He, the Super Silent I—the divine I Imperative, sure Impersonal One, Real Imperson- al is the wonder Imperative in Realizing Reaction in us.
He has to realize in Use in us the ‘I’. He has to realize in Use in I impersonal our I Impersonal.
We need to grow out of life dual to Oneness Form. We must see more.  We must  be far more
 
than we show to win in I individual as Use impersonal in intellect.
The I  as Use One  is Use general.
This form impersonal in Use in us in Intuition, He as Self realized, as One-in-I Real has to react to make in us—Him be in us—the reaction. We have to see the difference in Use in I Impersonal in I individual as  Use impersonal and the I Imperative in Use One as Use Real in us individual. "Here is the point to discuss with you," says Shri Meher Baba. Here He makes it clear: ''Let it be real and true the Use impersonal. Let it be good and One for Use impersonal. No mind impersonal is No One impersonal. I Indiv- isible as I Indivisible. I Imper- sonal is I as Use Imperative in all. That has to be action imper- sonal—reaction impersonal. I- Use impersonal in Use imperative is Me as Manifested One as Truth- realized Human Being."
Mind and body and spirit in One- All-One-Use have to realize the Imperative I. It is self-manifes- tation. It is Self in realized  wonder reaction. It is Use Impersonal all through  in  small in huge form, in small in huge I, as Use.
The realized real order im- perative in us, is to be. To be is to personify the Use. To be, is to realize the One-in-I
 

impersonal  Use.  It  is  Use  Im-	Who is One? God is I.
personal in Use One. This   is to	God is He as One as I.    As Use realize in Use in I, as whatever I	One—He is God.
order it is.
(To be continued)

