EVIDENCE NEWLANDS in 1864 arranged the elements in octaves and later Mendeljef arranged them in octaves and series. At the head of this atomic series we find the "zero group," known as the inert elements. This inertia is accounted for by being in a perfectly balanced or "white" condition, in which they partake of the nature of ether, and can be assumed to be related to ether in octaves. The series of elements runs from red in the first group, through yellow in the carbon silicon ele­ments, to blue in the halogens; iron nickel, cobalt, and their octaves Ru, Rh, Pd and Os, Ir and Pt, being 
violet, they are both magnetic and electrical in their properties. 
The groups increase in the number of elements, which suggests the harmonic relation, the harmonics increasing with each octave,  the formula for 
which is:        R = n (n -1) ,
 2 in which R is the number of resultant harmonics, and n the number of notes. 
The elements combine to re­establish the primordial "white" condition, or as close an approximation as the conditions will allow. The reds of group one uniting with the greens in group five, or the carbon silicon group, which corresponds to 
* Continued from January 1940 issue. 

yellow, with the violet iron nickel cobalt group. 
The law of multiple propor­tions gives a simple ratio between the weights of the elements in forming compounds. The strong­est attraction is the simplest, and the more complicated the association the more unstable, as the simpler conditions are the more attractive. 
The vegetable kingdom can also give evidence to this serial arrangement. The first fact that attracts attention is the chemicals used generally for farming. They are potash, phosphates and nitrates, respectively our three primates in colour. What do they do? Potash gives body and substance to the plants, phosphates stimulates the reproductive organisms, promot­ing flowering and fruition while nitrates promotes growth espec­ially in vines. 
The root system corresponding to red are the bulky globular type, yellow the fibrous, and blue the long taproots, such as alfalfa. 
There are of course all the graduations between these. The plants above ground follow the same classification, like cabbage for "red'', branching plants for "yellow", and plants that shoot up straight, like corn and the grains for “blue”. The relation between the part above and below the ground appears to be comple­mentary. 
Carrying this analogy into the animal kingdom we find them in the nutritive system, the repro­ductive, or renal system and the pulmonary system. The nutritive gives substance, the renal system promotes reproduction, and the pulmonary gives motive power. Nutritive people are fleshy and rotund, the renal people are delicate of skin, which is fair and moist, sensitive and sensuous. The motive temperament is tall and lanky, loves travel, and likes to be on the go, and a chronic case of "wanderlust". 
Here we emerge into the really human domain. The human attributes corresponding to our analogy comprise the muscular, the intellectual and the spiritual faculty or temperament. 
The muscular corresponds to “red,” the intellectual to “yellow” and the spiritual to “blue”. 
The muscular temperament gives power, tenacity, like a bulldog. They are of a square and stocky build, wide flat forehead. Examples can be 
found in every walk of life. Beethoven's massive orchestra­tions, Brangwyn 's massed colours, engineers that conceive railroads, transcontinent-canals, gigantic projects, and complete them to a finish, are of this type. 
The intellectual type corres­ponds to yellow. This type is generally interested in scientific or philosophical questions, a thinker, organiser. His stature is normal, his head pear-shaped, examples are Shakespeare, Mendelsohn, Julius Cæsar. 
The spiritual type is refined and has artistic tastes, they love beauty and harmony. They are artists, painters, musicians, poets, they are not tall and are narrow in the temples, have a narrow flat high forehead. Examples are numerous in all art classifications. 
We know that these attributes are in various stages of develop­ment in different people. It is also obvious that a balanced quota of each is essential for successful living. Power without brains, brains without power or initiative, either or both without the spiritual power to bring the matter in hand to a harmonious and beautiful completion, must obviously lead to failure. Here the law of affinity steps in. The sexes are normally attracted to each other by inherent necessity. The plus and the minus of one being balanced by the minus and plus of the other. 
A muscularly tempered man will find satisfaction in an intellectual and spiritual woman. 
Physically the man would probably be sensuous and motive, and the woman nutritive, if the physical and mental traits are complementary. 
According to Mendel's law the first generation resembles the father and mother equally, 50% each. The next generation 50% resembles both parents, 25% resembles the father and 25% the mother. This follows the harmonic law as we have seen that there is only one harmonic in the second octave and three in the next. The middle one being an octave of the harmonic in the previous octave, gives us the 50%, while the two new harmonics give us the 25% each closer to either parent: For example, if the father is predomin­antly muscular, and the mother intellectual-spiritual, ''red" and "green" respectively, the child will be mentally and physically halfway between them. 

This would be "yellow-orange'' in colour corresponding to a preponderating intellectuality with a moderate amount of power. The physical complement of which is "bluish purple" or a predominant motive temperament with some disposition to the nutritive. It would become tall and slightly heavy set, with very little sensuous inclination. It would have little or no artistic sense. 
These propensities go to make up the different individualities of humanity. 
CONCLUSION 
Evolution can thus be predicated only of the series and not of the etheric degrees, which appear to be in a nodal condition of quiesence in which they act as a passive fulcrum for the transmission of any impulses communicated to them, like the modulated carrier-wave in radio and television. 
Since intellect is only one ray of the spiritual spectrum, it cannot encompass the whole, as Plotinus has it, ''You ask, how can we know the Infinite? Not by reason. It is the office of reason to distinguish and define. The Infinite, therefore, cannot be ranked among its objects." 
As the body normally develops to a definite completion, so with the faculties of the mind. When this has been accomplished in the normal course of development the faculties are balanced and in this condition present a fulcrum for the impartation of Spiritual Light, first as intuition, then inspiration, and finally illumination. 
If we conceive of spirit as a mental degree of ether, the inference of clairvoyance, clair­audience and telepathy is obvious, this however en passant. 
Supporting this view also is the insistence of the Hindu and other schools of philosophy on "entering the Silence". 
John Yepes expresses it in a concise and logical manner: “When thou art quiet or silent, then thou art that which God was before nature and creature. Then thou hearest and seest with that therewith God saw and heard in thee before thy own willing, seeing and hearing began.” 
Walt Whitman likewise re­veals: "I would say indeed, that only in the perfect uncontamina­tion and solitariness of indivi­duality may the spirituality of religion positively 
came forth at all. Only here and in such terms, the meditation,—the devout ecstasy, the soaring flight. Only here communion with the mysteries, the eternal problems, Whence and Whither? Alone and identity and the mood—and the soul emerges, and all statements, churches sermons melt away like vapours. Alone, and silent thought and awe and aspiration and then the interior consciousness, like a hitherto unseen inscription, in magic ink, beams out its wondrous lines to the sense." 
Edward Carpenter states: “I became for the time, overwhelm­ingly conscious of the disclosure within me of a region transcending in some sense the ordinary bounds of personality, in the light of which region my own idiosyn­cracies of character—defects, accomplishments, limitations, or what not—appeared of no impor­tance whatever—an absolute free­dom of mortality, accompanied by an indescribable calm and joy. 
I also immediately saw, or felt, that this region of self existing in me existed equally (though not always equally consciously) in others. 
All I can say is that there seems to be a vision possible to man, as from some more universal standpoint, free from the obscurity and localism which specially connect themselves with the passing clouds of desire, fear, and all ordinary thought and emotion; in that sense a new and separate faculty; and a vision always means a sense of light, so here is a sense of inward light, unconnected of course with the material eye, but bringing to the eye of the mind the impression that it sees, and by means of the medium which washes, as it were, the interior surfaces of all objects and things and persons.” 
Edward Carpenter's description is a very apt one, which I am from my own experience, able to confirm in every detail. 
Nothing of individuality is lost, we are still that we were before crowned with a higher or cosmic consciousness, in which the emotions and the mind share in harmonious union. In this light all discrepancies and incongruities are automatically dissipated. We are conscious of immortality, and the thought of death provokes a smile like a child which discovers it was frightened by a paste-board ghost, which, like the fear of death, is wholly man made, and like it, has no justification or raison d’etre. 

We are in conscious union with Life Eternal, which is the life of the Universe and in which we are conscious of all those qualities we ascribe to God. We contact Truth in its profundity and the power of its stupendous magnificence. Joy and peace are the inevitable reaction, and the soul, mentally and emotionally, silenced in adoration. Here only is religion normal and natural! 
The mind and body are in concordant unity, the breathing is, as Amiel says, "A respiration broad, tranquil and deep as the respiration of the ocean, serene and limitless as the blue firmament." 
In conclusion, we will look to "Man in the sunshine of the world's new spring" and quote the following from Thomas Moore's Lalla Rookh: 
“But these, 'pursued the chief', are 
truths sublime That claim a holier mood and 
calmer time Than earth allows us now; this 
sword must first The darkling prison-house of 
mankind burst 
Ere peace can visit them, or truth let in 
Her wakening daylight in a world of sin. 
But then, celestial warriors, then, when all 
Earth's shrines and thrones before our banner fall; 
When the glad slave shall at these feet lay down 
His broken chain, the tyrant lord his crown, 
The priest his book, the conqueror his wreath, 
And from the lips of truth one mighty breath, 
Shall, like a whirlwind scatter in its breeze 
That whole dark pile of human mockeries. 
Then shall the reign of mind commence on earth, 
And starting fresh as from a second birth, 
Man, in the sunshine of the world's new spring, 
Shall walk transparent, like some holy thing; 
Then, too, your prophet from his angel brow 
Shall cast the veil that hides his splendors now, 
And gladdened earth shall through her wide expanse,  
Bask in the glories of this coun­tenance!” 
