


 
 
Is	a	Sectarian	Divine	Manifestation Possible	Today?
BY   DR.  ABDUL   GHANI   MUNSIFF

 
ALMOST every religion has prophesied and is eagerly awaiting the advent of a world teacher; but the sectarian or communal character of such a divine manifestation is too patent to be missed.
According to Muslims, the manifestation of Imam Mehdi is long overdue, and this happening has been promised fulfilment during the first one-third of the fourteenth century of the Mohomedan era. The Christian world believes in the second advent of Christ, the Zoroastrians are looking forward to their Soshyas and the Hindu world is expecting the tenth Divine manifestation commonly known as the Kalanki Avatar.
Synchronising with this expec- tant attitude of the world towards a new and fresh revelation of Truth, there have been saints of a high calibre from different creeds and climes, during the last and the present
 
century, who have claimed in their person the fulfilment of the spiritual demand of he age. But this claim on their part, as every one knows, did not succeed in commanding a world-wide appeal during their life- time; and if this claim is still kept alive, it is limited to a following, which in every case is not very extensive.
The obvious reason for this state of affairs is that such claimants, in spite of their intrinsic worth, identified themselves with a particular sect or creed. The irony of the situation is, that even such creeds have not accorded them fuller and enthusiastic recognition, as they did not fit in with the exclusive and traditional signs and symptoms, connected with such a Divine manifestation.
The resultant situation has been that the claimants have departed from the earthly scene one after anotheróthe prophecies still remain unfulfilled
 
IS SECTARIAN DIVINE MANIFESTATION POSSIBLE TO-DAY?	109
 

and the world is as expectant as ever.
The question that is required to be studied here very dispassionately, is whether the signs and symptoms connected with a fresh revelation, trad- itionally possessed by different sects and creeds, must needs be fulfilled literally or their significance is merely symbolical. If the former attitude prevails then no Divine manifestation however true and great is likely to find favour on a universal scale. It will be like a partial eclipseóonly a small portion of humanity will see it and a much greater portion will perhaps miss it. The universal character or claim of such a Divine luminary, can never be ascertained through  sectarian  clas-  ses and conversely if sectarianism characterises such a  manifestation  then  its  universal  claim  is marred.
For instance, the Muslim world believes that the manifestation of Imam Mehdi will be conditioned by the following characteristic features: The Imam's name will be Mohomed, his father's name will be  Abdulla and	his	mother's	name		will	be Aminaóthe	time	and	place	of manifestation will be the annual Haj
 

festival at Mecca. If these conditions are to be fulfilled literally, then such a Divine manifestation one can see, will be typically Muslim and as such may not appeal successfully to the non- Muslim world. Thus the universal character of such a revelation is spoiled and hampered.
The only rational solution there- fore lies in interpreting the conditions attached to such a Divine manifestation, rather symbolically than literally. Such an interpretation will automatically remove the sect- arian aspect of the revelation and it will be at once invested with a universal appeal, which the world would find it very difficult to resist.
The same can be said of the Divine manifestations, visualised by other religions as well. Surely no body with a clear and disinterested outlook on the problem, will ever concede or sincerely believe that the world at any time in the remote future would ever possibly consist of only Muslims, Christians, Hindus or Zoroastrians. Such a possibility evidently denies the wisdom and art behind the Divine
 

 
scheme of things which deliberately and meaningly perpetuates differ- entiation and manifoldness. The  truth is that all the existing cults and creeds will continue to exist if not actually flourish, according to the soul force and greatness of the founderónay, even many more may be added to the existing ones,  thereby making the path of discrimi- nation rather interestingly difficult.
The Muslims need not get unnec- essarily worried, over the loss or rather the modification of the exclusive nature of the Divine revelation in the person of Imam Mehdi, whose name  and  parentage as stated above exactly tallies with that of the Arabian Prophet. The  Sufis clearly see  in  this description, a very subtle  hint,  corroborating their belief, in that from  time  without beginning there has been only one Prophet (Avatar) manifesting Himself on the earthly plane, under different names and in different climes according to the existing needs and circumstances. Maulana Niyaz Ahmed Barelvi, the modern Muslim Saint, has voiced  this feeling in a beautiful couplet which reads:
 
''Yaray mara har zaman namo nashane  deegar  ast,
Kulle yaomin suratash dar shaklo  shane  deegar ast,"
(My beloved deigns to come down everytime, under a different name and in a new aspect; each occasion finds Him presenting a new form  and a different glory.)
In the light of the above  discussion if the literal interpretation of the prophecies of different religions concerning a Divine manifestation is ruled out, then it remains to be determined as to what characteristics must be present in such a revelation in keeping with its universal applicability.
It is not here suggested that the Divine incarnations, the world has seen upto now, had no universal outlook. On the contrary, one cannot think of personified perfection without a universal claim. In fact every Prophet or Avatar has claimed his message to be for the whole human race. But time and distance have always thwarted the universal fulfilment of their Divine mission on earth, coupled with the intellectual and cultural preparedness of the world they had to
 
 
deal with. Hence the messages of Perfect Masters, originally meant to be universal, came to be geographically limited in extensiveness; and these geographical limits in turn gave such Divine messages which later evolved into so-called religions, definitely a territorial stamp, quite unmistakable. For instance the vegetarian character of the Hindu religion is peculiar to the country of its inception and the non- vegetarian feature of the Muslim and Christian faiths is governed by the country of its birth.
Now that science has made such rapid strides in all directions, annihilating time and space, and the civilization of to-day has reached a stage incomparable in history, one can see that the territorial characteristics of different religions also are undergoing a subtle but sure metamorphosis. The religion of the Hindus as preached in the West, is not what is practised in India. The Muslims from Europe and America can now offer prayers bare- headed, which they would never think of doing in Arabia; and surely the Muslim divines would not object to the Icelanders offering their Namaz
 

(prayers) without the otherwise compulsory ablutions or dry-cleaning (Tayammum).
Thus there is in evidence to-day a tendency to philosophise religion without emphasising the ritualistic and dogmatic side thereof, with a view to make it universal. The esoteric aspect  is attempted to be brought out very prominently and the exoteric side is left for voluntary acceptance. The Dwaita (dualism) and Adwaita (absolutism) philosophies are pre- sented to the world by the Hindus, the Muslims offer their best through Sufism and the Christian mysticism is there, though apparently overshadowed by the materialism of the West.
Though these religious philosophies are offered with the best of intentions, the universal appeal in them is lacking for want of a living exponent or embodiment thereof. And such an embodiment of the basic truth of all religions, if forthcoming, must possess the following characteristics:
ìHe must not identify himself with any existing religion, although believing in the necessity and the underlying truth of all religions.
 

 
He must be able to demonstrate in his living and being Divinity humanised.
He must not preach but resuscitate religion by teaching men to live it rather than profess it."
Any such personification of Truth will undoubtedly possess a univ- ersal	appeal,	and	it	would	be immaterial if the Muslims call him a Mujaddid (revivalist),	the	Hindus hail him as an Avatar, the Zoro- astrians acclaim him as Soshyas or the Christians see in him their Christ. And Meher Baba says: "I am not come to establish any cult,   society
or organization; nor even to estab-
 
lish a new religion. The Religion, I shall give teaches the knowledge of the One behind the many. The Book that I shall make people read is the book of the heart which holds the key to the mystery of life. As for ritual I shall teach humanity to discriminate, express and live, rather than utter it. I shall bring about a happy blending of the head and the heart.
I shall revitalise all religions and cults and bring them together like beads on one string."
In this claim Meher Baba stands to-day at the bar of world opinion to fulfil himself.
We wait.....and.....see.
