For as the lightning cometh out of the East and shineth unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.” 
"Come and see the Acropolis at Athens," writes one enthusiast to his friend at home. "Come and see the Ellora Caves," writes another. "To see these alone is worth a trip to India." "Come and see the famous Master-pieces in Florence; their beauty will leave a lasting impres­sion," writes a third. 
Many there are ever ready to spend their savings, their earnings, their fortunes on these different quests, but how few are ever prepared to spend time or money on the Quest of the Spirit, which seeks for the perfection of beauty manifested in the human—divine form—the vision of Divine Love. The present gener­ation is seeking, but is nevertheless sceptical. It fears disappointment and disillusionment. It does not accept the "Quest of the Spirit" as "the Great Adventure", holding out to those who accept its challenge a cross as well as a crown, 
danger as well as safety, the sign­post of which says: "He that loseth not his life for my sake has no part in Me." Man wants security in the spiritual realm, as he now seeks it in the material. So the spirit groaneth within until such time as God sees man's willingness to co-operate, and he is born anew. 
Said one, long ago, "Come and see," in answer to His disciple's question, "Where dwellest Thou?" They came, they followed, they forsook all and found "the pearl of great price". Today, nearly 2000 years after, this same voice spoke to a little group in answer to the same question, saying: ''Come and see." They obeyed and are here—a small group gathered from all parts of the world, not in Nazareth, but in a spot not very different—Meherabad— situated on a hill looking down upon the village of Arangaon to the south and to the north 

of Ahmednagar, the famous military fort of past days. A group, not unlike that early group, of men and women of passion, impulsive, of little understanding. Some like wavering Peter, some like doubting Thomas, some with the intuition of John, some with the weakness but the supreme love and faith of Mary Magdalene, some filled with the cares of the household like Martha, some like Mary—calm and never ruffled, looking up at her Master with eyes that tell how she understands, ever ready to respond to His mood, ever thoughtful of His human needs and not worrying Him with her little cares and troubles after a weary day's work. How Jesus must have loved that thoughtfulness for His human side, and we know He was tired at times. 
Today can be seen a scene not unlike that of 2000 years ago. Shri Meher Baba, our Beloved Master, coming up the hill in the mid-day tropical sun, and, before He has had time to enter His room, being beseiged by one wanting a letter to be signed, another with some petty grievance, another with some domes­tic matter of no importance 
and Shri Baba patiently listening, not turning any away, weary and tired though He be, after bathing and feed­ing the mad down below. 
Previous to Shri Meher Baba's Ashram in Meherabad there existed but a stretch of land between Ahmednagar and Arangaon, a distance of about six miles. Twenty years ago Shri Baba "Pitched His Tent" a mile outside this village of Arangaon, giving the place the name of "Meherabad” which means land of Mercy, Kindness and Prosperity. The land around His followers tilled and sowed. Later was built a dispensary to which the poor from the neigh­bouring villages come for free treatment; a hospital for the mad who today would be called the "psychological mad", those sensitive types, restless within with their longing for God, and who without a guide have got lost on the Path, losing their mental balance and appearing outwardly as though mad. (Much has already been written in the Journal about this work of Shri Meher Baba.) Alongside is Shri Baba's own dwelling, a small room built in red brick with a green tiled slanting 

COME AND SEE 
roof. A little beyond are the quarters for His men disciples. Then across the railway track and up the hill are the women's quarters, on the top of which can be seen, for miles around, its white dazzling Tower with its ever burning light, a beacon to all, and a red and white flag flying from its flag post—the Eastern symbol— telling those who pass by, "Here dwells the blessed One." From near can be seen written in large golden letters, "Mastery in Servitude", Shri Baba's motto for all who follow Him. 
Up on the hill live the women from the West, sharing in closest detail the life of the Eastern group, who have been here since its foundation, the youngest member of the group being Shri Baba's own sister. All live an active and busy life, secluded only in the sense that no men enter its precincts. Outside the boundary wall is the women's hospital, a few steps only from the sacred spot where Shri Baba has gone into seclusion for months at a time and which previously was the sight of the "Prem Ashram". 
Such are the surroundings of Shri Meher Baba's earthly spiritual home, the atmosphere of which is beyond comparison. One speaks from experience, having only recently returned from a six months tour of India, visiting during that period the recognized Spiritual Places, and returning to this place— set on a holy hill—to breathe again with joy inexpressible, the pureness of its air, the freshness of its breezes and the beauty of Divine Love and Peace woven into every grain of its soil. This is Meherabad, the radiating centre of all Shri Baba's activities, the Place of Pilgrimage for the future. What have we seen? One, like Jesus, who draws men to Him through love. One who says: "I have only love to give and all I want is love." One who does not promise his followers earthly happiness, but who says nevertheless, "Be happy, be cheerful. Do not worry, do not brood," thus teaching from the very beginning that self-mastery holds the golden key to Divine Perfection. 
Picture Shri Baba with His group of men and women disciples and without even the spoken word, noting their every frown, every anxiety, every thought and feeling, and perhaps in front of all or taking one aside, spelling out on His board (His self-chosen means of communication prior to His mani­festation): "What is wrong? What has upset you? Are you worrying about anything? There stands the Silent One alongside of you with His Infinite Love and Knowledge, helping to bring to the surface and to speak out all the pent-up feelings, many of which are sanskaras from the past as well as the present, some of which you are not even conscious of;" and saying at the end: "Will you promise Me one thing? You say you love Me. You say you want to please Me and to see Me happy. Then remember, be happy and do not worry. I will help you. I know all. I know how deep is your love. Just do as I say. Love Me and leave the rest to Me." So the atmosphere changes from darkness to light, and each feels that here at last is One who understands, One who loves, and simultaneously the highest aspect of love is revealed. The almost im­possible task of not worrying, 

done for the sake of pleasing Him whom you love, becomes your dearest task, although demanding Herculean effort. 
Such is a true picture of our Beloved Master Shri Meher Baba, truly a Christ in His work for the saving of mankind, the supreme example of Divine Sacrifice, loving all equally and serving all equally, who, though possessing everything and wanting nothing, yet stands out amongst us as both the Lord and Servant of all. Why? Because He loves. His sacrifice is for love, with no other purpose or concern connected with it. This is Truth. Sacrifice for Love alone. 
Come and see! You will not go away empty, if your search for Truth and Love are sincere. Shri Baba will "quicken the Spirit within", and Divine Love once awakened will not slumber eternally, even though dimmed at times. God longs to realize Himself in us infinitely more than we can long for Him. The strength of the ocean will always be greater than that of its separate drop, and when once you face this Ocean of Love—like the needle before the 

magnet—nothing can resist its drawing power. Shri Baba is this Ocean, having become one with it, and we its individual drops, individual souls of the One Soul, separated but temporarily, that God might realize Himself consciously in us through Love. 
How do you know that Shri Baba is the Perfect One is a natural ques­tion. Is it through faith, through love, through intuition or through know­ledge? By knowledge? No. Only God can know God. Only the Perfect Master can be understood by the Perfect Master. There can be but one reply. By Divine Grace, by the Will of God which awakens the spark of Divine Love. Even so this glimpse into Divine Knowledge must be upheld by the response of our love and faith, and the latter being, in the words of the Apostle, "the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen", has in it an element that may both fail and err. But Divine Love from the heart, though weak at times, because not perfect in manifestation as yet, can­not err. Hence Shri Baba says: "Love and love Me always more and more.” 
This is a true statement. Divine Love can never be mistaken for carnal or human love. This is the verdict of those who have experienced both. 
To us, who follow Him, Shri Meher Baba is Love and Truth—the most perfect of all human beings. Perfect in love, in wisdom and understanding—attributes of God Himself. Said the Avatar two thousand years ago: "Be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect." And again: "The disciple is not greater than His Master, but every one that is perfect shall be as his Master," reiterating the Truth taught by Krishna and by all Avatars that all is God, in God and potentially God. To realize consciously this Oneness, through purity of Divine Perfection, is the purpose and goal of life. This truth Shri Baba has come to reiterate and to make live again. Towards this Perfection will He lead the world and those who follow Him, that all may be as He is, that they may know and experience consciously through Div­ine Knowledge their oneness with God. 
