
Oh, how we live in yesterday and plan for the tomorrow and know not how we are submerged in misery and sorrow, Attached to all material things which burden and weigh down, our souls are heavy laden from the day when we are born. We think that we are happy and call it liberty, but deep within we cry in pain for we are never free. From bondage and despair We would cover all with gold to buy the crown which we would wear regardless of the thorns, as sharper underneath they pierce; In agony and pain we pay for our presumption, and struggle to attain. But as the miser suffers according to his greed, so we Must learn our lesson and be brought through hell to feel that only real, true happiness in selfless work reveals. 
The good book says, "Make ready," for we are steeped in wine, to thus forget our troubles we forget "the words of Christ", Engulfed in riotous living and to ambitions cling, we sink deeper in the mire, and our loved ones we would kill. As the wheel of time turns slowly, it must revolve until it reaches perfect balance and then go round again. That time is now. The change is here and we in readiness stand to await the "second coming" predicted through the land. 
MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
As the wise men of the East saw the star where Chirst was born, 
so from the East He comes again proclaiming, "Love is All." Our lamps we must make ready. Prepare the way the Lord, 
as Avatar who all in One is Infinite in God. 
The centuries pass. All time is naught. In creation there must be an endless Love encircling to reach Eternity. From whence this Love? From God to God, and it is so pure that bathing in its blessing our hearts become secure, in deeper love. Impartially does Baba Love each one of us the same, for under the skin we are to Him as children now untame. All barriers will He demolish. Together religions mould, and only one language will be on earth as He carries us all in His fold. It matters not from East or West, or North or South He came. Even if India claims Him and wants Him for her own, To us He has kept His promise and returned to earth again and sheds His love upon us. All glory to our King ! 
. 
