
I is said that a certain person borrowed some money from "Lookman"*. After some time he wrote to Lookman that he was very busy and that he could not find a trustworthy man with whom he could send the money. He suggested, however, that it would be better if his son came to receive the money. Lookman decided    to   send    his   son  and
 
gave him the following three suggestions to act up to  if necessary. At the end of the first stage of his journey, he (Look-­‐ man's son) would arrive at a certain banyan tree under which  he shoul take care  not  to  sleep; and on reaching a big city at  the end of  the  second  stage,  he  should

retire  into  the  nearest jungle for		competent    and   thoroughly   ac-­‐ rest,  instead  of  taking   abode  in		quainted    with    the   route   hap-­‐ that    city;    and    finally    at    his		pened to meet him, he may follow destination,   i.   e.,    the   debtor's		his  advice.  The  old man assured house, he should not  take shelter		him	that	he	had	thorough under his roof at night. He further		knowledge    of    the  route,   and, said that if he happened   to come		therefore,  he  should not hesitate across  a  competent  guide,  more		in listening to his advice. In short, experienced than himself,  he was		both		of	them		spread	their at  liberty  to  take  his advice and		beddings   under   that   tree   and act up to it.		went to sleep. At  about midnight, Thus    forewarned,    the    boy	a   big   snake   climbed down  the started on his journey. He had not		tree.    The    old    man,  who   was gone  far  when  he  met   an  aged		awake,  killed  it  and  covered    it
traveller   who   asked   him as  to	with the shield he was carrying. where he was going.   On learning		In  the  morning  they  decided from  him  his destination, the old	to proceed on their journey. Since man  replied  that  he  was  bound	nothing  untoward had happened for the same place and   would be	overnight	and	the	tree	had glad  to  accompany  him. So they	afforded  him  great  comfort,  the proceeded   together.  When  they	boy    thought    that   his   father's arrived  at  the  first halting place	advice not to stay under  that tree where    the    banyan    tree    was	had   no   meaning.   The old  man standing,  the  old  man  said  that	who  could  read  the  boy's  mind, they  would  rest  under that tree	seeing   that  the   boy  was  losing for the night to escape    from wet	faith  in  his  father, informed him weather. The boy replied   that he	of what ha    happened during the was  advised  by  his  father not to	night,  and  pulling  out   the  dead take shelter under that   tree. The	body of the snake from under the old man enquired if that   was the	shield held it before his eyes. The only  thing  his  father  ha  said, to	boy  felt  much  relieved.  The  old which the boy replied that he had	man  then  asked  him  to  cut  the also   told   him  that  if some one	head  of  the  snake  and  keep     it
with  him;  for  he  said,  "A thing 
preserved often proves useful, be it the venom of a snake." The boy complied with it, and they both proceeded on their journey.
When they arrived in the capital city, their second halting place, the old man proposed that they pass the night there. The boy did not object to it, and they went and stayed in an inn. It was the custom of the place, that whenever a young stranger chanced to arrive in the city, he was perforce married to the  king's daughter by order of the king; but the next morning he  was invariably found dead. Incidentally the king was informed of the youth's arrival, and the youth had to appear before him, who immediately got him married to the princess. The old man, however, advised the boy to put the head of the snake on the fire, and make the princess inhale the smoke rising from it, before he retired with her to the bed chamber; and the boy did so. The princess was suffering from a malignant disease of the womb, and which meant sure death for the bridegroom. Through the effect of that remedy, however, she was cured of that malady, and
 
next morning the boy emerged from the palace safe and sound. The king was greatly pleased.
After a short stay there, the boy and the old man started on their journey, and when they finally arrived at their  destination, the old  man proposed to stay in the house of the debtor. The boy did not object, as he ha grown wise by experience. The debtor, to avoid paying the debt, thought that it was a good opportunity to kill both of them. He, therefore, after exchanges of common courtesies, asked them if they would like to sleep inside the room or outside it. The old man replied that the weather being sultry they would like to sleep outside in the open air. Thus during the night they sojourned outside, while the two sons of the host slept inside the room. At about midnight the old man awoke his companion,  on  the pretence of feeling uneasy on account of cold blast, and suggested that they should  go into the room and request the  two sons of the host sleeping there to exchange places with them. The boy approved of the plan, and they managed to prevail
 
upon the sons of the host to sleep outside, while they made themselves comfortable  inside the room.
After some time the host came to execute his sinister design and unhesitatingly killed those sleep-­‐ ing outside. In the morning he found, to his great consternation, that he had unwittingly killed his own sons. He could not  do  anything but keep quiet over this affair, for it was his own doing which knew no remedy. On the other hand, for fear of being exposed by his guests  who  were  in the know, he thought it wise to pay up the debt and see them depart as early as possible. On receipt of  the  money,  the  boy with the old man left the place for home. The old man took leave  of the boy exactly at the place where he had first met him, with a  request to remember him to his father. The boy asked him his  name to which he replied that his father knew him well. On arriving home,    the    boy    related    all  the
 

various incidents of his  journey to his father, and enquired of him as to who the old man was. His father said that it was the  Prophet Khizr.*
To a layman this story would make an interesting reading;  but  to understand the spiritual  value  of this tale and arrive at the true moral of it, one may interpret Lookman as (Asle-­‐Usul) the Real Source; the traveller as (Salik the spiritual aspirant;  the  stages  in the  journey  as  the  different phases through which a  Salik  has to pass (Manzil); the old man as (Pir-­‐e-­‐Kamil) the Perfect Master; the snake as (Nafs) the  devil  or  low desires; the princess  as (Dunya) the sensual world; the house of the debtor (Khana-­‐e-­‐ Maqruz) as  the  physical  world;  the debtor as human being;  the sons of the debtor  as  the  people  of the world and money (Mal) as love of God  (Ishq-­‐e-­‐Ilahi).
In short, a spiritually minded person will find enough food for one's thought in this tale, simple yet pregnant with meaning.
