Before enlightenment shows one clearly who one is, there are the false self-assertions: I am a man, my name is Jack; I am a woman and my name is Jill. 
Before SELF can assert Reality, all false self–assertions must be denied. And since his body is the source of his identity as Jack, a man, and the cause of false self-assertion, he must deny his body–wants. 
The body wants food and drink–so food 
and drink must be denied. 
The body wants rest and sleep–so rest and 
sleep must be denied. 
The body wants to sit, to walk about–so 
sitting or walking about must be denied. 
But it is impossible to deny for long the body's wants. The better way, the way that is evermore delightful and easy, is to begin to forget oneself until self-forgetfulness becomes so complete and absolute that nothing is remembered except the Real Self. 
The various spiritual disciplines have been evolved to help one forget one's false self, and when faithfully practised they not only advance one on the Path of Forgetfulness, but, because of the law of action and reaction, all those closely related to or connected with the self-forgetting self experience some spiritual advancement. The more the self-forgetting self forgets himself the more he is remembered by all those connected with him, and the more these remember him, the more they forget themselves. 
Now one of the easiest ways of cultivating self-forgetfulness is to concentrate on a picture of the Master, for this helps the aspirant shift, to some extent, his concentration on himself to one who is the being and form of Perfection. And when the picture upon which he concentrates becomes alive, this is called Illumination. And this seeing of the alive picture brings about further forgetfulness of self. 
Soon he has no more thoughts about himself at all: his whole mind is focused on the living face and form of the Master who is the eternal Beloved, and eventually he merges in Him forever. He then knows that he himself was all along the Reality of his own concentration. This is Self-revelation, and in this is real Self-assertion: "I Am That". 
The forgetter of himself has become the rememberer of who he is, and all those who forget themselves in remembering him are also liberated. As it has been said of old–if one member of a family attains emancipation, with him are emancipated generations of his past and also his present connections. 
Self-denial is arduous, forced, and self-forgetfulness is easy and natural. Self-denial would be the quicker way if it could be done, 

but it is impossible. Even if the aspirant succeeds in·overcoming, say, hunger, after awhile he begins to enjoy fasting. This is a new want–he wants to fast-so he must deny his pleasure in fasting and eat, though even the sight of food may nauseate him. Or again, he succeeds in conquering sleep and enjoys wakefulness–he wants to remain awake–and if he is to master that want he must sleep, though to sleep seems like losing all that he has so hardly gained. 
There becomes no end to denial and counter-denial, and even the strongest will and the stoutest heart will break down on this path. But Self-forgetfulness can be practised by everyone and its way is easy, delightful and safe because it is always under the tender regard of the Master. 
