





Impressions on Shri Meher Baba 

BY DELIA DE LEON (London) 

All my life I have had two intense desiresóthe first came to m e when I was very young (abou t nine). I was then at a b oarding school in the West Indies; so perhaps it was the beauty of a warm tropical star-spangled night that stirred my imagination to wonder what was beyond, and m y childish f ancy picturing God as sitting on a throne just behind the stars started a train of thoughts in m e that, though often dimmed, still persisted and gathered force and intensity as I grew olderóto know and understand about God. 

The second desire came later. I wanted to actóto be a great actress. Both desires ran parallel and were the pivot of my life. The first haunted me; I could not escape it. Not being attracted by conventional form s of religion, I investigated all the  ' isms' and strange cults. I read avidly books and poem s that told of mystical and spir itual experiences. Jesus especially attracted me but quite outside the Church. I travelled a great de al, and although I enjoyed life with its many experiences, deep down I was restless and dis≠satisfied. I mostly did as I liked, for I was spoilt and self-willed. 

   The second desire led me through various channels to becom e part pro≠prietor of a little expe rimental theatre. Strange fact that it was in a theatre that the event took place which was to change the whole current of my life, for I only started to be alive from that moment. 

    In the theatre work I was happy and busy; after m any ups and downs suc≠cess came, but it lasted only a short while; suddenly everything started to go wrong. I lost practically all m y money, and I eventually reached a period when I was at a low ebb, phy≠sically, mentally and spiritually. It was just at that psychological m oment, though what at the tim e seemed a mere chanceóthe reading of a letter in a weekly paperóthat I was drawn to a place where people told me of a great Spiritual Teacher and of His impending visit to the W est. My ins≠tinct to go to th is place had b een so strong that I knew nothing could pre≠vent it. As I clim bed up the hill at the top of which stood East Challacombe, I felt very exhilarated. Was I not on the threshold of a strange and thrilling adventure? 



While I was ther e came a wire that He was already on His way. He arrived in September 1931, and it was at the Coliseum during a perform ance of "White Horse Inn" tha t I first met Shri Meher Baba. I was to have seen Hi m the following day, but it was suggested that I should com e that evening. S ome friends took me into the box. I felt shy and nervous. He looked at m e kindly and made me sit next to Hi m. I had seen His face before in my dream s; the eyes were startling in their beauty, the face seemed of luminous honey-colour, framed by a halo of long dark hair. The hands were most noticeableóthey kept up an incessant pantom ime, and were strong, slim and sensitive.  

    Someone said, "This is your surprise, Baba." He patted m y hand, and I think from that mom ent I must have intui≠tively recognized Him as m y Master, for I suddenly wanted to cry. I felt stunned. The stage, the actors seem ed to recede and to become vague and far away. 

   At the end of the performance I knew I must see Hi m again, and He nodded to my request. I went hom e as if in a dream. That night I slept very little. I kept thinking of Hi m, and next m orn≠ing, much to the astonishm ent of my family, I rushed off at an incredibly early hour for me. 

During the week of His stay in London I saw Him every day. Time and place seemed not to exist. Everyone and everything faded from my m ind except Baba. He alone seem ed realó the Perfect Human Being. Compared to Him everyone else was like a shadow. He drew m e irresistibly, His love melted me, and His humour and charm attracted me. His silence was more potent than words. It is not what a Master says but what He is ab le to convey of Truth and Love that is im ≠portant, what He is Himselfóthe fact that He embodies in Himself the Christ qualities. 



    In a world where everyone is shout≠ing and talking, what we need is ex≠ample. Something deep within me recognized these qualities in BabaóI could not explain or analyse it. I just knew (for myself) wi th certainty. I had nothing to say to Hi m. I felt I loved Him and had faith in Him , and knew I could not be disappointed. 

When I looked at the people passing in the streets, I thought Baba is in the world and they do not know it, and it seemed strange that it should be hap≠pening to m e. As the poor barber said of his meeting with the Buddha: 

The Blessed One passed by my house, My house, the barber's. I ran, and he turned and awaited me, Me, the barber. I said, "May I speak, O  Lord, with thee?" And He said, "Yes." Yes, to me, the barber! And I said, "Is the Peace for such as I?" And he said, " Yes." Even for me, the Barber!  

And I said, "May I follow after thee?" And he said, "Yes." Even I, the barber! And I said,"May I stay, O Lord, near Thee?" And He said, "Thou mayest. " Even to me, the poor  barber. 

During the tim e I have followed Baba, I have been asked m any ques≠tions about Hi m from people who are curious, antagonistic, interested or friendly. They want to know why I follow Him, what does He teach and what does He intend doing for hum an≠ity, etc. I can only answer from my own understanding which is naturally very limited, for how can anyone understand a Perfect Master? But if people ask out of antagonism or interest, they have a right to be answered. Baba definitely claims to b e a Perfect Master. So the approach to Him should not be along conventional lines or preconceived ideas as to how He should carry on His work. Those who turn against Hi m usually do s o because He does not act according to their id eas of right and wrong. They cannot stand the pace or the tests He sets, and fall away blam ing Him for the weakness that is inheren t in themselves. 



    Pipa says, "When the true Master in the world appeareth He shows Himself to man as m an." It is Baba 's humanity that makes Him come down to our level to raise us up to His. He gives to each individual according to one 's needs. So the ordinary m odern man coming to Him gets practical common-sense advice; for what would be the use of a Divine Being so rem ote as not to be able to help us to live our everyday life; 

He says that He has com e to give a Spiritual Push to hum anity and to awaken the individu al to his real S elf, that is, to reach the sam e state of consciousness that He has attained; this He will do, not by teaching new dogmas and creeds, but by the inspir≠ation of His Love. 

He brings Peace, but it is edged w ith a sword. For this process of "dying " or the elimination of the "ego" is painful, and He has often to destroy before He can rebuild. He works through maya (illusion) to overcom e maya and uses our vices and virtues to get us  to that state which is beyond all duality. Most people, not understanding this, expect an immediate outward change in Baba 's disciples. They do not realize th at, al≠though at one 's first meeting the change is definite and fundamental, it has to be worked out in life along normal lines. 

In the sam e way that a sculptor chisels at his stone and knocks off all knocks and excrescences until he gets the likeness he requires, so Baba seems to do the sam e with human beings. He breaks down all attach ments, even of ideasóHe tests in all sorts of ways. He makes promises and breaks them , and will go on breaking them, until you can stand on your own f eet and not ask for anything. For a Master will make use of even lies if it is necessary for your ulti≠mate good. Som etimes He will blame you for som ething you have not done before the guilty person, just to see how you react. He expects you, when He asks, to be prepared to give up all ties and material considerations for Him. He uses your strength and attacks your weakness. 

    One of the main faults of the 



West and the cause o f most of its      For even if Baba speaks or does  

troubles is the greed for wealth and  some-thing startling to dr aw the  

possessions. So Baba m akes it one of  worldóor whether He is rejected as  

His chief points of attack. Most people  most Avatars óit is really His work on  

are full of fears and am ass money for  the individual whic h is enduring and  

their future safety and security; so Baba  permanent.  

by releasing this fear does what all the  What is there about Him that not  

psychologists cannot do, however much  only holds me, but so m any other men  

they stir up the sub-conscious. For He  and women of various types, som e for  

helps people to transm ute their baser  more than fifteen yea rs? For myself I  

desires through love w hich alone can  would say, His hum aneness, His power  

free. I have watched this happen over  to transform the m ost common-place  

and over again, and seen people give up  things of life with beautyóand above  

the habits and desires of a lifetime. So  all His Love, and the Love that through  

when people ask m e about miracles, I '  Him I am able to feel and which has  

tell them that Baba s greatest miracle is  made me more of a human being.  

to change the hum an heart. This H e is  All these things bind me to Baba, but  

doing, and as He does it in individuals,  the deepest experiences are beyo nd  

so will the world gradually experience a  words, for as Baba says: "Things that  

change in consciousness.  are real are always given and received  

in silence."  

ï  
