"We are passing through an unparallelled spiritual crisis; materialism and belief in the intangible joys are considered the be all and end all of life, and the younger generation as a whole is losing faith in religion. 
Though there have been periods of ignorance concerning spiritual life, never before was it so aggressive, nor did it take the robe of reason as it does today. People are going away from religion and seeking light from the sciences, and they end by becoming atheists. Their 

knowledge is no better than what can be called inspired ignorance. 
In the present spiritual crisis, ignorance concerning spiritual values derives inspiration and justification from the provisional conclusions of certain sciences. The present sceptical and materialistic tendencies turn away from the historical religions and look to science for guidance in respect of the fundamental values of life. But though science has its own place in life, it cannot replace religious experience. There can be no sure guidance for humanity except through the Truth contacted through deep religious experience; and this experience must be first hand and free from all the inessentials of rituals, dogmas and secterianism. For effective guidance humanity cannot rely upon merely abstract principles, but needs the living contact with the consciousness of Masters. 
Science has given wonderful things. It tells us of the laws of nature and the universe. But it is only a means for realization of ends, and it cannot tell us what life in this planet is meant for. 
The great German poet and philosopher, Goethe, died with the words "More Light" on his lips. The mere intellectual pursuit of science is not going to satisfy the human longing for inner light, to find something stable and eternal. In short God is a matter of direct experience, and cannot be proved intellectually. 
The next question, therefore, is, wherefrom are we going to get that light for which we are all longing? If today this light is to come, it has to come from Masters of Wisdom. 
Humanity has always accepted Prophets in the past, and in spite of the snobbishness which is character­istic of superficial thinkers, human­ity shall accept the Master today. Shri Meher Baba has the supreme confidence which has belonged only to the Prophets, and humanity has to look to him for the light which will help it to come out of the present chaos. He appeals to something far deeper than intellect. 
It is not by mere talk of love that real brotherhood of humanity can be established. It requires the release of actual love in everyday life, and this needs such awakening as can 

be effected on1y by a Master. Shri Meher Baba can perform this miracal of miracles through the power of his Divine Love and spiritual under­standing. He can raise our cons­ciousness to the plane of Unity and make us forget our petty differences, and there is in those who meet him a veritable spiritual rebirth. To those who are ready he gives God-realization or the clear-eyed vision of the Divine Reality as it is. I bring a Message of Hope for those who are deeply concerned with the present spiritual crisis." 
COUNTESS NADINE TOLSTOY said: "The practice of certain yogic methods eventually led me to Shri Meher Baba, and in him I found the Yoga of Truth, Faith and Oneness and God. His perfect guidance has awakened in me the pure spiritual vision of the living Truth which is attainable only through the elimi­nation of the ego. 
Great seekers after Truth have failed, because they had no proper guide, and today we want a Rama, a Krishna, a Buddha. a Zoroaster, a Mohamed, a Jesus, etc. Life in Meher Ashram under the guidance of Shri Meher Baba is the true school of spirituality, and he is at once the Lord and servant of man. He reveals by his shining example the meaning of the realization of the One Life in all its aspects and manifestations. He has come to help humanity for the sake of Love and Truth, and in his presence one feels as if clouds of distress and doubt and impurity are removed. 
In all our tours through India I have had an opportunity to see her great saints well known in their respective places, and I found that in Baba they recognized God the Beloved. Shri Meher Baba is the greatest Master of the age, and we bring his name to you as the highest lesson in life." 
PRINCESS NORINA MATCHA­BELLI said: "The work of Shri Meher Baba was made clear in his words, 'I have come not to teach but to awaken,' and enable men to experience Truth direct. He is the Awakener of the Infinite in life. He is the Love Incarnate. He enables men to love in life even those whom he does not like. As Shri Meher Baba says, the highest human love is not the highest Abso­

lute Love. The divine is the highest of the all pervading love, and one who gets Divine Love gets God. 
Philosophies and intellectual gymnastics make one intellectually certain about the existence of God, but it is only the love for God, the Divine Love that enables one to find Him, to feel Him and become one with Him. The highest love is that which is selfless and disinterested, and this will help to have a life of happiness and liberation in which man is free from prejudices and is unattached to life and its play through the opposites. The new citizens that we have will be in the world but not of the world. 
Shri Meher Baba has come to give us life real, to make us realize Truth direct, and before him one has only one feeling, and that is one of a great awareness, a pure rhythm and a life spiritual. He brings to us a new dispensation which will help man to fulfil the divine theme which in him is realized in the form of the paramount state of God-man and to draw him to the divine source." 
SPEECHES FROM THE CHAIR Mr. N.C. KELKAR, who presided 
at the lecture in Gokhale Hall, Poona City, on 20th June 1939, said: "The speakers of today's meeting are all disciples of Meher Baba. You all must have heard about Meher Baba; but the thing which is not perhaps common between you and me, is that I have had the actual good fortune to meet him in London when I had gone there for the Round Table Conference. From his very look one can at once see that he is spiritually great. He is a world Teacher, and his messages are such as would be expected from the World Teacher. Although he was maintaining silence, he gave to me some messages through his board, and I was impressed by him; and though I do not count myself amongst his disciples, I consider it a good fortune to have met him. Meher Baba was born in Poona and is a citizen of Poona. It is worth­while your going to Ahmednagar and meeting him." 
DIWAN BAHADUR KRISHNA­LAL MOHANLAL ZAVERI, who presided at the lecture at Blavatsky Lodge, Bombay, on 22nd June 1939, said: "Today's speeches are 

on the present spiritual crisis and the need of an Awakener. Everyone would admit that today there is a spiritual crisis. In the great Bhagwad Gita the Lord has said that such times of spiritual crisis are bound to occur again, and that at such times he himself comes to the earth again and again. The present spiritual crisis is such as has been anticipated in the Bhagwad Gita. The speakers are disciples of Shri Meher Baba. We are happy to have as one of the speakers Countess Tolstoy, a relation of Count Leo Tolstoy whom Mahatma Gandhi looks upon as his spiritual teacher. The principles for approaching the Sadguru for light, of meditation and of selfless service (nishkam) which have been held before us as parts of Shri Meher Baba's teaching are principles to which no exception can be taken." · 
