 
Who is that Man?
BY  COUNTESS  NADINE TOLSTOY

 
WHO is that man, who in the  early morning around 4 o'clock gets		up,		mysteriously		alive, extraordinarily calm, yet dynamic, so deeply engaged in inner work; one	can		see	it	as		He	moves around	or		swiftly		signals	in jesture of his own, seemingly sending out into the world the inner wires of speedy response to an urgent call. How will they  reach their destination, these sure orders of protecting guidance and invisible Authority? Who is this vigilant Guardian who  watches over the world, who looks into hearts and takes the pain of their sufferings, that do not seem to leave scar on His heart;  who checks		up		every	sacrifice	of kindness and love? Who  is  he  that is responding to a  distant  sigh or a call of despair?
As we sit together in His company do we not see the significant changes that pass on His face and the subtle signs of His response to the need; what and where, He knows alone, together with those distant to us, but near to Him. Did He not ever so often let us know and feel that He knows all our feelings, all our thoughts,
 
all our actions? How often a nod  or a jesture, a smile or a penetrat- ing look will suddenly reveal that, in spite of our  forgetfulness  we are not alone, that no ripple can escape		His	knowing		presence, ever One with us in our struggle, moods and victories. And who is the one most discreet, who leaves. you so completely to yourself at your ease till you come to a point of real need of help in  your struggle		and		suffering?		Who, without being told will catch first at some insignificant incident or impulse and, as everyone will be drawn into this happening, it will be made to grow, bringing  to  light		all		that		was	concealed within them; in unexpectedness one will be easily taken unaware, spontaneously contributing to the crescendo		of		speeding	climax, subtly brought about by the skill of the Knower of the hearts. You find	your	ego  exposed		to	its nakedness, yet helped by Him,  you feel released and aloof, His Iove crowning it all, dispersing clouds and sadness.
How subtly it is brought about, with what skill He lets you know that He feels for you, noticing every thought
 

 
of kindness or discord, every difficulty in the struggle with yourself; just in the right moment He will either encourage and approve you or chastise, clearing the grasp within, strengthening your higher aspirations and will.
As He is leaving in the  morning for the other Ashram, it is he who will see to the slightest details for our little needs of  every day, inquire about the sick; attend to our meals and errands, which have to be transmitted to some one down in the village;  His care will not forget even the least in the Ashram—our pet animals; drawn to Him they will wait for a loving pat or some  food from His hands.
Every second the wheel of life will go on and on, turning out its big and small events and duties to be done. Equally patient and undisturbed He will minister  to all life in need or rebirth acting as a perfect being, yet so understand- ingly human. He will do it all  with unexcelled precision and alert thoughtfulness leaving nothing uncared for or unpre- viewed; and nobody will be excluded—servants, mehtranies, and the absent ones as well.
As He goes down to the Mad Ashram, what is He going to do? who is that man who makes them feel His own, whose sight is the unique hope and joy of their life
 
Again He does it all, every day over again; He washes them, He feeds them, He takes their latrines out into the fields; winning their hearts and spiritual response in greater light and joy! One by one they will be attended to, His sacred hands will give more than outer cleanliness and physical nourishment; His every touch and look will transmit a new impulse of life beyond the visible form! Day by day this gradually infiltrating life and love will spread its radiations and revive deep within not only the healing nature forces, but the very spark of the heart; this contact in the heart will bring them all the happiness and spiritual healing of the awakened spiritual glimpse in consciousness; it will make them altogether new, regenerated by new understanding given to them for permanent use and progres- sing growth. Resurrected by this influx of life, light and love they become prepared for enlighten- ment. Yet as He works, creates and moves about nothing is spoken in words, as He is silent, using His direct creative power within life itself and only on few occasions referring to His alphabet board, to convey the message in words. Steadily this perpetual spinner and weaver of life-tissue, sustains and raises the growth of real being within its outer appearance with
 
 
patience, superhuman patience. He is ceaselessly doing and undoing within and without, throwing in, throwing out as He purifies men from all impurities of bad thoughts and feelings, adding to their slight efforts towards overcoming selfishness.
As He attends to His meals, when eating, He seems to remain engaged in His  invisible  work also using food elements as an automatic  yet  creative  medium for His work in gross substance; the drinking of  water  is  equally an	act	of		washing		of	some impurities			of	others	away together with its  immediate  use as a drink. When His devotees send or bring along some gifts, as soon	as		they  are	opened,	the baskets and boxes are  emptied  and everything is given away, distributed	among	those		who need it most. The visitors would kneel	in		greatest		elation		in receiving the blissful opportunity of this contact of Love; children with gleaming eyes would  seek the touch of His hand or embrace. Often		people	would	bring especially selected useful apparel of fine wool or silk, happy to give Him comfort–a sign of their love. For a moment He will rejoice, making much of their thoughtful- ness; yet seldom we see  Him  wear those gifts—someone else probably needed them. On the other hand, how often we have
 
seen Him accept or do something just not to disappoint the feelings of His devotees, as a mother would do with her little beloved ones. Usually He turns those occasions into subtle hints of real selflessness even in giving or accepting gifts, setting example and inspiration for pure unconditional giving. Love is what He wants more and more. The rest must go or is immaterial, as ultimately nothing counts, real Love remains sublime. Why would He refuse at times hundreds of thousands of rupees offered to Him and accept  with joy the least and the last of another! Is it not to bring out in  us the pure heart, the spontaneous act of Love? And He knows the remedy for each—what is good for one will not do for the other.  It is always for the permanent good of their spiritual progress. What does the rest matter, even temporary pain and agony, He wants them strong in conscious surrender of their imperfect selves; it is the sign of greatest trust and love when He expects  us to follow Him as He orders, to the highest pitch of our spiritual ascent. It is His Grace that takes the ripe opportunity, for the inner operation of hidden roots of the “I”. They know too well that  even a shock well stood will lift one higher in balanced strength and calm; then the worst things that may
 

occur in life will find them well equipped with detachment and immunity	amidst	the	turmoil. One really wins the test, when what one knows in thought, in word,	in	feeling	and		under- standing becomes a fact in being and in life; such souls He will need for His spiritual work. For them His will becomes their will  as their highest love response;  they have found in their personal experience that whatever He does, His only aim is to help their highest spiritual Selves for the  sake of the Truth.
Again in afternoon hour we  see Him, with His perfect pre- cision, going through His other daily works: correspondence, accounts, His own messages and plans. The materials for the Meher Baba Journal also go through his hands.
Only an objectively imper- sonal, completely selfless being like this man can have the unparalleled freedom to use all means and circumstances of life for the inward speeding of spiritual destiny of Man. Every time that the weak points in the character of His followers have yielded, helping to steady the non-reacting state of detachment, it showed what good it brings about and thus the True greatness of this man becomes ever more revealed. His objective aloofness and selflessness  have  proved  its
 

Divine origin and purpose; His willing bearing of the cross of fellowmen makes one sure of the purity of His heart and mission. Only a spiritually  free  soul  can be so divinely unperturbed. Even suffering will not affect His heart, for His love is super-human, as well as His knowledge and His power. How can any manifes- tations of human nature affect the one		who		asks		nothing	for Himself and gives all of Himself, the	one	who	is		completely unselfish and pure, the one who does the greatest sacrifice in a countenance not  seen  in  men, who acts as one who knows the unfathomable secrets of life; as one who can see everything far beyond the visible scope of life.
Sorrow or laughter, beauty or ugliness, outward action or stillness, this or that in the dual play of life for Him contains no question, no surprise; everything has its place to fit the universal plan and will  of  life.  His  life  is a masterpiece in being and acting all the roles of creation; He plays with men's joys and sorrows; yet [as] sacred He holds the keys to happiness and to the mystery of life. Great treasures are locked up in human heart and He knows best how to unlock them. The change in outer rhythm in game becomes an inner order of new stimulation changing the static moment into the joy of revival. We
 

 
see that He is concerned with all life as it is; His work is a perpetual life-stream of creat- iveness whatever He touches. . . As one comes in closer touch with Him one can feel that He is an uninterrupted contact with the whole of creation, as well as with particular individuals in need.
Animals and pets could make a special chapter of the greatest interest and importance as  He treats them with  equal  loving care. Are they not only one of life's specimens in evolution? All kinds of animals have shared the blessings of His touch: dogs, cats, snakes, cows, donkeys, horses, deers, monkeys  and  mangoose and so forth; often birds with wounded feet and broken wings will be picked up and brought to Him; or He will carefully put an ant into  safety  outside.  All  sorts of birds have been brought up in most tender way under His care; they would hover around room  and eat from the hands. And then He would  remark  how  fortunate is the animal or bird even if it should have to die under His eyes. It would be the greatest thing that could happen and what a rare opportunity!	They  are  going  to be promoted to a higher grade in evolution and some for special qualities or due to their response  to love would be advanced even   to the incarnation of a human being. He says: "There is no
 
death—it is all life."
He says that Jesus has spoken about things like “impressions” (sanskaras) and ''incarnation", etc. Only a few places in the New Testament have escaped the censure and they still give proof of those points to those who want to accept them as they are. In life and death, that unique being  helps Life in all its forms of transition and growth. How many times, unknown and invisible, He has stopped the hands of  desperate sufferers ready to commit suicide and has turned their whole outlook of life by giving them the light of true understanding.
And who was that "voice  in  the heart" which called the reckless unbeliever to follow Truth or to once more make a good effort to obey this “voice”? He knows the hearts of men exactly as they are; what does it matter if they call themselves unbelievers, agnostics or even atheists; what does it matter what labels and names are given,  to  the ideals they are seeking, to the Joy they are longing to exper- ience?
His Love without words and teachings will light the heart anew. One who sees His  eyes  and knows His smile has felt how irresistible it is; how it opens the heart spontaneously flooding it with joy that indeed passeth understanding. He is
 

 
evidently one with all  life.  This we have also observed, as He would		cleanse		the	atmosphere from undesirable astral presences, from	those	invisible		to	us "intruders" who hang around as hungry vultures or as satellites attached to their beloveds. The torment of those mental states becomes	immediately	released and cleared away, as He  orders and makes them depart.
He said once: "You see me suffering for this world as I work with you and all, but how much more I have to stand as I am pricked and knocked on all sides by hordes of beings on the subtle plane, which you cannot see.''
He helps all those  affected  by the shadows of the departed who are feeding their desires on the weaknesses of this world and drive their victims to despair. In this domain there is no other source of competence and power, but a Perfect Master who controls all planes beyond the physical about which men are hardly rightly informed.
We also have often seen the signs of His work, as He was controlling the nature elements and forces. All of a sudden He would begin to speak about the rain, that it is too close, that clouds are gathering, that it will rain or may not rain; all along He would bring about just  the desired result, for important reasons of His own. And we see
 
in the assigned time a storm will bring an outburst of waters or a steady rainy day, or on the contrary, threatening clouds will be cleared up. In a very hot day He would order the wind to come and cool the heat down. But it is   a trifle of passing value; He does not like others to talk, even to notice much those things; He has His one purpose to serve, it is for the spiritual upbringing of the world.
How much in  the  world people are concerned with their health, pulling the spiritual teachings down to the physical plane and material comfort. Yet we know that great Masters and Christ Himself have only used their power for certain occasions in view of the spiritual end of their work. How often the very suffer- ing of pain, serious sickness and   a prolonged confinement in bed can become the means of highest opportunity for spiritual longing, for real recuperation in spirit and complete change of their whole being. Those real Teachers will utilize every opportunity, sick- ness included to promote the world spiritually; they are not bound by ignorant interests and selfish concerns of the physical plane; the true Masters are aloof from standardised attitudes of the world and the outlooks of so- called "schools" which often unconsciously cater to the human ego and its
 

 
limited understanding.  The  fact  is that He can what no man can; He knows as no one  knows  and  He  serves humanity moved by  Divine  Love alone.
He may postpone death if it serves the Realization of the Higher Self; those cases and people are well known in His circle. At another time, for spiritual reasons He will prolong sickness of someone most im- patient for recovery and finally He will bring out the patient, physically and spiritually re- generated, as no medium for perfect health itself could ever do. Their love and absolute trust in Him endure all in surrenderance and obedient patience and make them staunch and radiantly happy.
At times those around Him see Him lying down completely eovered, head and feet, with a blanket; then all are still in devotional respect to His work— one feels He is doing especially important, deeper work, function- ing into the mental and subtle consciousness of those  whom  He is contacting. "As you concentrate on me as I work universally, you share in the benefit of my work" He says. We feel the shadows of our mind removed, purified, serene in greater harmony with our higher Selves with our growing love to  this unique Friend of all living beings. He does it all silently, supremely
 
discreet in His greatness, but sure, unfailing far even the suffering, which He takes upon Himself,  does not affect His happiness and freedom.
As He retires at night no one crosses the wall of our Ashram. He goes into His tiny one-room dwelling to "rest in work", ever   to work unfathomably, when all the world with all its animate and inanimate creatures sink in the slumber of the dark. At times as the veil gets thinner and when He promotes the experience of that kind, we would see Him on a subtle plane and inwardly go through the process of His work within our inner selves in subtle function; we feel its spiritual uplift and deep  purification  which strengthen the higher Self and prepare the heart for selfless love. His work may act like a sudden storm or it may make its way gradually, step by step, within the law of cause and effect of all life's developments.
What does it matter if some cannot see or understand? He knows it all: the why and when, and where and how. His Love  and Authority welcome all conditions, as it is, even opposi- tion, which He needs for His  work as a dynamic element in life. The impartial  universal  scope of His creativeness is of Divine nature though He is  human in His outer form.
 

(To be continued)