NEW YEAR 


1939 

BY ABDULKARIM ABDULLA 

The new measurement of im≠measurable time commences with the beginning of the year 1939 and we take this opportunity to offer our hearty best wishes for a spiritually happy New Year to all people the world over for the New Year starting on January first, the New Year already in force since the recent Pateti of the Parsis and Divali of the Hindus and the New Year that will shortly commence for the Muslims in Moharrum. 

According to the law of cause and effect, as long as space remains to be accounted for, time has necessarily to be reckoned with. If religion and phil≠osophy start with a definite beginning and a distinct end for time in the ultimate Reality, science and mathe≠matics end in admitting an incalculable past and an unfathomable future for the same in the ever-shifting and never-sta≠tionary present.

 For everyday purposes mankind rightly measures time in years and, in spite of the glaring diversities in the day-to-day affairs in life, humanity is fortunately one in the method of calculating year by year this funda≠mental factor of all earthly life. A re≠markable feature in this connection is the worldwide consistency in main≠taining a common compass of a com≠prehensible hold on the fast slipping time. The last point to which the mass mind can conveniently stretch and strain itself backwards appears again to be an unanimously fixed limit of about two thousand years. Even those who claim the origin of their culture and civilization in the hoary past have found an outstanding event of singular importance in history to hook on the immediate present within this period. In fact all the outstanding current eras on the face of the globe are well within this particular orbit. 

Hindu 1995 Sanvat; 

Christian 1939 A.D.; 

Muslim 1358 Hijri; 

Zoroastrian1308 Yazdezardi. 


Amongst many other unmistakable signs, the approaching end of the 20th century in which all the other eras are passing through almost their last quarters, portends producing one universal New Year at no distant date. Time alone will tell the exact day when Baba speaks and the first New Year  'after Silence' begins to enable hopelessly divided humanity to drown its petty selfish differences into the past of pardon and forgetfulness. 

In the meantime we join in the ensuing joys and prayers of another year in the spirit of the immortal Hafiz: 

"Transitory is life, its pain, 

and pleasures, 

Then to laugh out of it, the 

wise one prefers." 

To laugh into the New Year with merry-making is a good beginning to pass out of it happily. But only a few succeed to this end. The majority who indulge in the New Year festivities of laughter and lights, do it simply in a sense of superstition as if the happy beginning of a year is in itself a pass≠port to peace and plenty of succeeding days and months. 

There can be no better example to belie such a notion than the Muslim New Year that always commences in mourning with the month of Mohar≠rum, since about thirteen hundred years, on the tenth of that month, the two grandsons of the Arabian Prophet preferred to lay down their lives than give up the principles of truth and fair play. In spite of the dutiful mourning of the Mahomedan world every New Year in commemoration of one of the great≠est spiritual tragedies on earth, the history of Islam differs in no way in the usual ups and downs of time and tide compared with any other history in the world. 

We pray that India, the land of saints, will soon succeed to put an end to the unhappy struggle long going on between the Hindus and the Muslims, the sons and the daughters of the same motherland regarding the two different aspects and two diverse manifestations of the same Truth which will ever remain One without a second. 

When ordinary buildings in a thickly populated area are pulled down, extraordinary is the cost to build better ones and make good the incidental damages. The sacrifices re≠





 

quired to atone for pulling down vio≠lently the structures of settled humanity and disrupting whole countries seething with men, women and children is be≠yond calculation and imagination. It is, therefore, all the more necessary to pray for strength and fortitude for the apparently fortunate countries to be able to bear the colossal suffering and infinite privations destined to follow in the wake of their gigantic undertakings for the supposed betterment and welfare not only of themselves but other nations and races that necessarily involve numberless sins of commission and omission against God 's own crea≠tion. 

The little message of hope and cheer that we can give to races that appear for the moment to be unfortunate is, that it is better to be sinned against than to sin, and that one of the greatest spiritual blessings and boons is, uncalled for and uninvited suffering. Sooner or later, as surely as daylight follows darkness, such calamities are bound by the universal law of nature to bear fruit of freedom and salvation. 

We cannot at this juncture forget to remind those homeless, friendless and helpless victims of natural calamities like flying storms and forging floods, raging epidemics and heart-rending accidents that there is no new life without its twin of a birth pang; for all its horrors are soon rewarded with a greater happiness.

    It is beyond us to say anything in the limited language of the lay mind for those grand souls consciously basking in the sunshine of the spiritual path, but we wish many happy returns of the day to all those who may have even once remembered God for the sake of God, or done even a whit of service, or loved anyone or anything for the sake of love without hope of return and longing for reward, without fear of punishment and fettish of privileges. 

We dare say that a New Year is an occasion of deep lamentation for those who consider the world to be the 'be all ' and 'end all ' of life, and who have consciously and actively done nothing towards understanding life's true purport. The year passed is certainly a year lost for them. 

Although during the last fourteen years of Baba's silence 


it has been repeated more than fourteen his group to hear .that Baba will speak times, nothing can yet be sweeter for and speak soon. 
