
BABA retired for a period in seclusion. He also made short tours during the month, one in the South of India and the other in the Mysore State. Both were private as he travelled in cognito. He received none of the public during the month, neither in Bangalore nor during his travels. 
BABA'S 46TH BIRTHDAY 
Baba’s 46th birthday this year fell on the 15th of February (according to Parsi calendar). In accordance with his express wish, there was no celebration this year and the auspicious occasion passed off very quietly. 
Numerous messages of love greetings however were received from his disciples and devotees from all over the world, by cables, telegrams and letters. 
THE CENTRE The construction work of the Spiritual Centre at Byramangala 
continues. A special staff from Baba's group who have been entrusted with the duty of supervising the work done in accordance with the Master's plans, have gone to stay there in special quarters built for them. 
THE GARDEN SCHEME The plans for the lay-out of a landscape garden that has to cover the whole area, has been entrusted to the well-known architect and town-planner—Mr. G. H. Krum­biegel—who has already worked out a number of beautiful schemes of towns and parks throughout the State and also in other parts of India. 
NEW MASTS FROM THE SOUTH As our readers are well aware, Baba’s work with the masts has been continued since 1936. His special attention and care for these, as he repeatedly refers, has a great significance for his future work in which these advanced souls have to play an important 

part. Wherever he goes he contacts numerous types of these—bathes and feeds them—and keeps with him those whom he thinks fit. His knowledge of the existence of parti­cular types and stages of these masts in differcnt parts of the country and the way in which they are contactcd and brought over is remarkable. These facts have already been explained in our previous issues. 
While in Bangalore, Baba pointed out certain spots, knowing where a particular type or one of a particular stage of advancement could be found. His disciples, specially trained in this most arduous task, trace them in or about the directions indicatcd and bring them to the Master. Their adven­tures in tracing these various types of spiritually advanced souls, with their peculiar traits, are as trying as they are interesting. 
In a few cases where the mandali fail either to find or to induce the particular masts as described and wanted by the Master, he would either go himself to the place, contact the particular one and bring him over with him, or at times by merely going round the places 
where they stay, he subtly works in a way which attracts them, and they then follow the mandali sent out to bring them. 
There were two particular men of highly advanced stages whom he wanted from India. He first sent his emissaries to bring them from their respective places of habi­tation; when they did not succeed in bringing them, Baba himself went to these places, and the holy ones, who never moved out of their respective shelters where they lived for years and where they were actually worshipped as saints, followed like lambs when the Master appeared. Those of Baba's mandali who have been hunting after these rare types of masts for over three years and have brought so many of them from time to time to the Master, are really amazed at the change that the Master’s presence works in these peculiar types. Those who at first refused to budge an inch from their years of habitation, then meekly submitted to the request of the mandali and literally followed them after they felt the Master’s presence and atmosphere in the surroundings. 

At present, in Baba’s special Ashram for the God-mad in Bangalore, there are half a dozen of these masts brought over from different parts of Southern India, in addition to the others already brought over from the other Ashram for the masts at Meherabad, Ahmednagar. 
Brief accounts of Baba's tours in South India and in Mysore will be described later in these issues by those who accompanied the Master during the respective tours. 
BABA’S MAN—THE TEST OF A TRUTH SEEKER 
Amongst the visitors in the afternoon of 30th December 1939, was a young Swami from Bengal, clad in Bhagwa (ochre robe). He came with another Swami from Bangalore of his age and attire who had already met Baba. During the conversation 
it transpired that he had renounced all—father, mother, family and everything—in search of God and had gone round many places in India even to Tibet, and was just returning from Rameshwaram.* 
He came to know of Baba in Bangalore and although many others wanted to discourage and deter him from paying a visit to the Master, he felt an inner urge and was determined to see him at all costs. To-day he was happy at the privilege of having the Master's darshana; and so was Baba, to find a very rare type of a seeker whose one desire and aim in life was for God-realization. 
THE INTERVIEW 
Baba.—It is very easy to give up father, mother and family, but very difficult to realize God. 
The Swami said that he was
prepared even to give his life for God-realization. 
The credit and greatness is in living and loving God, above all. 
Baba.—Even dying is easy. This longing of yours is very good and highly appreciable. I want men of your type who have no other thought or desire but to realize God—for that is the only real thing in life. 
The Swami felt very happy for these encouraging words and said again that he was prepared for anything. 
Baba.—But I will test you— and it won't be easy. Just think over it and let me know later. 
Swami.—I have nothing to think of, I have thought over it so much and so long, as to cease thinking of it any more. 
Baba.—(smiling) Then you are MY MAN. 
The Swami felt happy, closed his eyes and drew a deep sigh of relief at this recognition by the Master. 
Baba.—I would still like you to think over it quietly, for I know of others who, in their momentary enthusiasm, have said similar things, but fail the moment they were put to test. 
The young Swami replied that he had washed his hands of every thing. 
Baba.—Bravo! I am glad. Then I will guide and help you to your cherished goal. Now listen care­fully. As a preliminary step, I want you: 
(1) 
To go to Rameshwaram on foot. 

(2) 
Eat only once a day and beg for your food. 

(3) Touch no money. 

(4) 
Touch no woman. If you happen to come around any, remember your mother. 

(5) 
Take darshana of 100 people in Rameshwaram. 

(6) 
Be back here by the 1st of February. 


The moment Baba referred that he had not to touch money the Swami pulled out from his waistband a small piece of cloth in which were tied some money at one end. He threw it on the ground just in ready response to Baba’s injunction regarding money. 
He uttered not a word of complaint or excuse at all that Baba said but kept quiet. 
Baba's test was very hard indeed—rather impossible to cover all this distance on foot in only one month. In fact, his friend, the other Swami, tried 

to whisper into his ears at first discouraging him and even try to draw Baba’s attention on behalf of of his friend that it was practically impossible for his companion to return by the 1st of February if he went walking. 
But Baba sweetly remarked, “That is his lookout. How does that worry you? He doesn’t. He says he is prepared for anything and is determined even to die, for God.” 
Baba then cast a significant glance at the young Swami as if to ask what he had to say. But the Swami said not a word. With silent determination, he rose, to leave, with Baba’s permission and blessings. 
His determination and longing were really remarkable. Baba let him go. The other Swami also went out after him. 
The mandali in the room watched all this secne with silent admiration. 
The two Swamis had just gone out and must have reached the gates of the compound, when Baba ordered one of us to call the young Swami back. 
He returned alone. The other Swami went his own way. The 
young aspirant faced Baba again, prepared to stand any new ordeal he may be put to. 
Baba smiled at him first, and said, "I am very happy you stood my test and didn’t hesitate or question, nor ask for any excuse to get out of the difficult situation, even with your injured foot, (he was limping on account of a boil on one of his feet). If you keep up your longing for God and the same spirit to stand all tests, you will surely realize Him. He is there— in you—and always with you." 
The Swami replied submissively, "R... M... and the other saints whom I saw also said like that, but I have uptil now experienced nothing out of all these words." 
Baba explained, "R... M... was right. Ramakrishna said that. Vedanta says that. Pandits say that. All say that. But it is a matter of experience. I want you to realize it. That is why I take interest and in­struct you to do certain things. 
I want you to follow my instruc­tions as already given, to go to Rameshwaram, not by foot but by train." 
The Swami tried to say some­thing by way of explanation but hesitated. Baba knew 
it and asked him to speak it out. The Swami gave out that he had no sufficient money for train fare to go to all that distance and come back by train. 
Baba ordered a few rupees to be given him in addition to the Swami's money, and told him not to worry, but just accept what he had said and act accordingly, with faith and determination and without the slightest hesitation. 
"Take this money. Use it for your rail fare. All other instructions same as already explained. Go to Rameshwaram and come back by the date I told you," Baba repeated. 
"But Master, I just come from Rameshwaram," the Swami smil­ingly put to Baba. 
"It will now be a new Ramesh­waram for you," explained Baba with a significant look. 
The Swami closes his eyes, feels an inward happiness at these words from Baba. He has an ecstatic expression on his face which conveyed that he realized the significance of Baba’s words. 
Baba.—There will be many who will try to discourage and dissuade you from this, saying 'What are you doing? Why are you wasting your time? Where are you going?' and so on. But just listen to all this with one ear and let it out with the other. Bless them all and go your own way. Persevere, and fear not. I will always be with you. You will feel my presence and my help. 
The Swami closes his eyes again. He feels deeply touched by Baba's words. The expression on his face conveys again the inward happiness he feels at Baba's presence and marked injunctions. 
Giving a reverential bow, mut­tering the significant word—Om— the Swami leaves the room for the great test. 
* * * 
The Swami returned promptly on the day fixed and presented himself before the Master. An interesting account of his first ordeal under Baba and the interview with him on his return will be published in our next issue. 
* * * 
PURE LOVE 
On the eve of December 24, 1939, Baba gave a discourse on “Pure Love” to a visitor, an advocate from the mofussil, a simple and plain-spoken man. He quite frankly and gently told Baba that he had heard so many people talk about "Love" and wondered what Love really was. An interesting conversation ensued, during which Baba explained this subject in his usual simple yet masterly way. 

Baba.—Are you married? 
A.—Yes. 
Baba.—Have you any children? 
A.—Yes. 
Baba.—Do you love them? 
A.-Yes, in the ordinary way. But I cannot say that is real love. My object is to have real Love, not this mayawik affection or attachment. I visited saints in the hope of experiencing real Love, but so far have not succeeded in any way. 
Baba appreciated the man's longing for true and Divine Love and said, "You must first under­stand what real Love means. Selfish motives, even in what people call love, often deceive them and they mistake selfish feelings for love. I will make the point clear with an example: A person talking of love will say, 'I love my beloved. I want my beloved to 
be with me' and so on. But in all these expressions of love, the ' I ' and 'My' are most predominant.'' 
Another example: "Suppose you find your child running about in tattered clothes and feeling unhappy about it. You will readily feel for it and do all in your power to get good clothes and make the child happy. On the other hand, if you see a child in the street in similar conditions, i.e., in torn and tattered clothes, would you feel the same and act as readily as you did in the case of your own child. If not, it shows how your attitude towards your own child is merely a result of your selfish feeling. 
Your feelings could be called the outcome of true Love only if your attitude towards the unknown child of a stranger in the street were the same as towards your own child under the same conditions. 
Complete absence of selfishness is therefore the true characteristic and real test of Pure Love." 
Baba then proceeded to de­scribe how this Pure Love or Di­vine Love can be experienced. He pointed out that it is not something which could be forced upon somebody who  
could be snatched away from another. It is attained after the aspirant has succeeded in overcoming selfishness and when the “ I ” for him does not exist. 
Explaining how this selfless stage could be reached, Baba pointed out, "It might be said that it is difficult to attain and at the same time it could also be stated that the stage is easy to reach. Paradoxical as these statements might seem, they are never the less true. 
It is difficult to attain to the stage of selflessness so long as the aspirant has not resolved to reach it. In the absence of a firm deter­mination, the external attachments connected with the lower "self" prove too strong to be overcome, with the result that the aspirant does not find it possible for him to attain to his goal. 
On the other hand, if the as­pirant, with a strong will, decides once for all to achieve his aim at any cost, he finds his task easy. 
For example, you have an old coat which you like much. You cannot get rid of it until you make up your mind and boldly take it off to do away with it once for all. 
The bold decision makes the task easy which would otherwise be difficult." 
Baba went on further to explain: “Self-renunciation is so necessary for experiencing Pure Love. This 'renunciation' does not mean that one has to leave all the worldly connections and affairs and go to the jungles. It really means remaining in the world and discharging one's own duties faithfully, yet keeping aloof from all attachment. This is not an unattainable ideal but a practical goal which can be attained with ease, provided of course the aspirant sincerely and boldly resolves to reach it.” 
Concluding the discourse Baba pointed out: "Just as a man, when he is hungry, feels so, similarly when an aspirant desires to experience Pure Love, he feels the longing for it, and at the proper time he gets the necessary directions and help from a Master to attain to the goal of ‘desirelessness’ and is able to finally enjoy the Bliss of Divine Love. 
This is a state to be exper­ienced and not to be intellectually described." 


