What is a Baba Lover Part 2. 
Be a Baba LoverñNot a Babble Lover By Dr. Harry Kenmore © Dr. H. L. Kenmore 1970 

In the previous article we discussed the question "What is a Baba lover?" and we found that a Baba lover is not one who goes about babbling about his love for Babañsucceeding only in making you conscious of his babbling rather than of his love for Baba. 
This conduct of over-vocalization is usually the enthusiastic behavior of the fledgling aspirant on discovering in his world of need, the Advent of Meher Baba. However should these effusive laryngeal histrionics continue without a deepening growth of his 
attitude about Meher Baba then his childish prattle is 
only a babble about his love for Meher Baba. 
We learned that among the fast growing numbers of Meher Baba followers there are Baba inquirers and readersñthose who scan print about the life, works, messages and declarations of Meher Baba. Those who attend meetings to hear discourse readings of Meher Baba are just Baba listeners, and if they generate a lot of excited feeling about what they hear, they become Baba enthusiasts. Should they stroll from one sectarian group to another, returning full circle to a Baba meetingñstill undecided about the particular credo they will follow as the central motif of their lifeñthey are Baba shoppers. It is evident that there are different kinds of aspirants who are interested in and follow the Spiritual Awakener, but how many can be aptly designated as lovers of Meher Baba? 
This is the first and only time in the history of our Cosmos that the Avatar has appeared and appealed to humanity directly and revealed to us that the secret of all life is not only to love God, but to become actually and personally involved with Him as His loverña lover of God. In this Advent He has smashed this eternal and perennial fairy tale that God is some guy up there, out beyond, or down below. Nor is He a long bearded guy occupying a hunk of sky somewhere. He's no person, place nor thing. God is your real Beloved. To gain everlasting Union with our real Beloved (who indeed is our real self) we must surrender all our possessions. And what are these "possessions"? Initiates labor under the misleading notion that their possessions are their property, stocks and bonds, bank deposits, hi-fi equipment, wife, husband, sweetheart, children etc. Surrendering our real possessions means to abandon our habit patterns of desire-thoughts, want-cravings, the whole of our illusion-perpetuating egoñall of our impression-ridden mind. 
In the past, humanity was told "We should love God with all our heart, all our strength, all our mind", but it was a Commandment whose significance was wholly lost on its listeners. At our end of the time spectrum, today's Avatar tells us that we should be real lovers of God and to become this we must first fall in love with Him. Please remember, this is an ego-liquidating 
romance that happens inside an individual. Now God is where He's always been and always will beñinvisible, silent, and fast asleep within us. This is the God, the Divine Beloved, with whom we must fall in love. Meher Baba, the living Personification of the Divine Beloved, has come to awaken us, to awaken our hearts, to the Presence of His Divine Residence in us. When we constantly think of Him, silently calling out His Name again and again, He will be compelled to stir, to awaken, to rise up in response to our persistent call. 
Modern psychology avers that one of the reasons why mankind has gone wild, flying off on a tangent, is that it suffers from the absence of the giving and receiving of love. Now, actually, the only one you can ever love is yourself. You don't love another personñyou can express love, you can beam love, you can radiate love, but you don't love anybody in particular. Anyone who comes within the personal orbit of this radiation, however meagre or bright it may be, will feel what you are and then the response will be automatic. If an individual truly loves you, it is because you already experience and reflect Love. 
Love begets love. But what makes us able to love? First we let God Love us because He is the Source of Love Itself. Love is only an abstraction when we think of it as being a part of God, but when we think of the person of Meher Baba who is literally the Incarnation of Divine Love, ah, then we have personal contact with Love. Then we can feel this Love generated from Him to us and we feel His beneficent Love inside us. This is a real experienceñnot the sort of love we are able to conjure up with our imagination. It's an actual happening and all of this takes place inside of us. 
And what does this Love do? It ignites the Divine or Love-Spark hidden in us, blasting it into flame. When it begins to burn after an unbroken and continuous response accompanied by the feeling of an abysmal gap of separation from our Beloved, then we know what it is to fall in love with our adored Beloved. Those who are on drugs don't know what a real burn is because they've never experienced the igniting of this Love-Spark by the Incarnation of Love, God Himselfñin the person of Meher Baba. How could it be possible to experience this Love by taking an outside agent inside of you? All you get with the ingestion, puff or needle is the hallucinatory by≠product of irritated and toxic body tissues. This Love is something that is gathered within yourself by yourself as the result of your own tenacious effort. 
What Meher Baba has to give is open to everybody; but the fact is that only very few are capable of receiving it. Why? Because only a few are able to make a full commitment to surrender their lives to the Incarnation of Love. You won't get the All until you give and surrender all. That's the Law. It is interesting to note that the anatomical heart of a person functions according to the "all or none" law. All muscle fibers of the heart musculature contract simultaneously as a single unit. Similarly, the heart (that feeling portion of the mind) must be surrendered in total commitment to the Lord of Love, Meher Baba. 
Only His Love will save us, save humanity, from all of its ills. And this resplendent Love makes its abode in us when we let it flow into our hearts. Selfishness and self-interest and its attendant ills and shortcomings will be dispelled, displaced and discarded. There will be a les≠sened tendency to anger, hatred, jealousy and resent≠ment in our reaction to irritation and strain. Certainly, these impressions will not only be mitigated, but they will become nil under the action of Love's influence for as we become Love's ally our whole existence is transformed by this Love. This overpowering feeling cannot be shared with anything that's less than itself or antagonistic to it. It dominates everything in us, and everything around us. It is this Love that gives us that calm, that poise, and the feeling of absolutely belonging not only to God, but to ourSelf. As Meher Baba has often said, the search for God is silent, sublime. It isn't even a searchñthere's really nothing to findñbecause He is already there within us, but we must open the heart to receive Him and then He becomes known. 
We grow up physically to full height and we say we're a man or womanñbut are we really? The emotional infant in a mature physical frame is hardly a fit candidate for the give and take of God's Love. Let's always bear in mind that Meher Baba has issued His Call to maturity. Only a mature heart can accept His Love. Someone once wrote that when a man says he loves you because he needs you, he's immature, but when he says I need you because I love you, that's the beginning of maturity. Let's recognize that we need His Love; it isn't something we want, we must have it because this Love is something that is a part of the very matrix and fiber of our makeup. Without it there isn't any reason for existenceñthere's really no existence at all without the fulfillment of this needñthis need for Meher Baba's Love. 
In time there must come a deep yearning, a longing, and we'll let it long, and we'll let it torture us. The Beloved is not a candy pop or a popsicle that we suckñ something that's going to give us sweetness and little droplets of "happinesses." Should we feel this way, then we aren't loving the real Beloved. The Belovedñand this is the secretñis going to be very cruel, testing us every step of the Way. Difficulties and hardships will be the rule rather than the exception, but if we have our hearts set on the realization of our real Need for His liberating Wine* of Love, and if we crave continuously for this Wine from the Beloved who's Almighty God Himself, Meher Baba, then we won't let up being conscious of, and desiring fulfillment of this Need until our Cup* is full and we've drunk it down, every drop. And in this test, when going on seems almost unbearable and almost impossible, God will give us a sip of His Wine. He'll give us His Love that gives us the courage, strength and stamina to go on, but our going on is gotten from where? From inside. We get it as the result of our own steadfastness, our own unremitting effort. This tenacity is what pays off. This is what becomes cumulative and never lets us down. 
God never lets down a real lover. He becomes absolutely responsible for His real lovers. This quality of complete responsibility and absolute honesty is what always intrigued me about Perfect Masters (Sadgurus). Just think of it. When the world's degradation makes it ripe for the descent of the Avatar, it is the absolute honesty of the Perfect Masters that brings Him down. This tamasha is not their Divine cup of tea. They know that the UniverseñHis Creationñbelongs to Himñthe Eternal Commuter to this earth sphere! And they know also that He is the One who is responsible for initiating the modus operandi which made them Perfect Masters. 
Similarly, God is absolutely honest with each real lover. His Love-Call is issued to all, but only a few hear and respond to His Call. Why? For the simple reason that only a few of us can be wholeheartedly genuineñ sincereñin wholly dedicating and committing ourselves to the attainment of this I AM GOD stateñUnion with the real Beloved. 
When Baba listened to the Qawalis (Baba was a perennial fan of these spiritual love songs) He used to tell the Mandali "Oh, if you could only comprehend the real depth of these words." I fondly recall how Baba would gather His Mandali in His living room, usually in the morning, and crank up the ancient gramophone to spin the old 78 r.p.m.'s. And Baba would be drumming with His fingers on the rim of an ordinary metal water basin; His fingernail flipping accompaniment was extraordinary and unique. After hearing a verse or two He'd signal to stop the music. Then He'd gesture the real meaning behind the verse instructing the Mandali how they, His real lovers, should continue to parallel the conduct of the lover in the Qawali. 
These Love songs would say, "Beware you who want to become a lover of Godñif you only knew what you were letting yourself in for. Don't cry out for this Wine, because once you do, your life will become nothing but turmoil" Now, remember, this Wine that we get doesn't deteriorate us, it integrates us more and more. It strengthens us, makes us more firm and dedicated and gives us power and forbearance. Above all, there's that tremendous sense of integrationñcompleteness. 
The only madness we feel is madness for the Beloved. But, of course, we're not mad. If we become really mad after the Beloved we become a Mast. We loose consciousness of ourself and of the world, yet still our body, our character, and our purpose will suffer no deterioration. We can go on for decades until God gets a whim to release us from this trapped state of God-Intoxication, God-Absorption. 
As real lovers we've' set ourselves on an uncharted sea and no one's at the helm but one Captain and that's GodñMeher Baba. Let Him also be the Compass pointing in Realization's direction, for He is the only Way and the only Goal. Now God's Love is something that grows gradually in us. It builds up slowly and then one day, when we least expect it, it'll take hold, and it's going to scorch us inside. That longing and that yearning will sear the inside of us from head to foot. Then all we'll want is Union with this real Beloved, and we'll know that nothing has meaning in life except the winning and harboring of His Love. 
But, remember, the whole of this beautiful experience happens inside of us. When Love really enters the lover it seals his lips. He talks to no one about it. There's a smile on his face, but the tears are there inside. To the one who really loves, to the one who cries for God, there comes a moistening of the eyeballs. And those tears are like pearlsñthey don't roll down the cheeks. Those that roll down the cheeks are the hot tears of self-pity, but the tears of Love for God are cool and are retained in the eyes. 
Birth in this body has been taken by us for solely one reasonñto become a real lover of God, who is our real Beloved. And there will be no patience exercised and there'll be nothing tolerated in this world until our quest 
for Union is fulfilled. When that happens we'll know that the One we've been seeking inside all the time, was simply our Self. In the heart is enacted the drama of lover, Beloved and Love. That is the real Trinity of Existence. As Hafiz once said, "Lift yourself aside. It is you, Hafiz, that stands between Love and the real Beloved." Then let us remove ourself so this merging can take place. Let's dedicate ourselves to becoming real lovers of Meher Baba, and then Meher Baba will really give to us and exercise within us the Beauty and the Power of His Divine Love. 
