
Weak Tea with Strong Talk ñ Part 2 ñThe Role of Woman 
Judy: Doctor, does Baba say anything about a woman 	has a marvelous opportunity to serve others and 
being married and also having a career? 	forget herself. A woman has the opportunity to think of others more than a man. You're losing yourself in 
Dr. Kenmore: Well, you see, Baba doesn't object to 	remembering them. That's selfless serviceñOh yes, if 
your having a career as well, but women haven't been 	it's really undertaken. Now, if you're in search of 
trained with the idea that it takes an awful lot of skill to 	prestige or you're in search for extra money so you 
be a wife and a motherñmore skill than you'll ever 	can buy things because you want to have as many 
dream. When you have a family, the idea is to have a 	things as so and so down the block or across the way 
home and a family that is made comfortable. Actually, 	or what not, well, you haven't got the right values in 
the woman really steers and guides the direction of a 	life. That's why the family is torn apart. Women don't 
family unbeknown to the man. It takes a lot of 	know their function. If you have a little ability, pour it 
ingenuityñmore than you'll ever dream. Your brain is 	into your children. That's what you want to do. So they 
more alert than you'll ever dream if you really want to 	can pour it back to you and pour it out into the world. 
use itñwhy, to prepare cookery and baking and keep a 

house clean and do the laundry and all of these items. 	Francie: What happens if you have a financial problem 
Now, if you're trained to look upon these as being 	in a family? Should the woman go out and work? 
menial and say, "I don't like it," that's just a matter of Doctor Kenmore: If a family unit has a financial 

habit. You say, "I like what she does sitting at a desk" problem? Well, there, you see, a marriage has been 
or doing this or doing that. Then, of course, you're the contracted where the unit was not ready for marriage. 
victim of phony propaganda. After all, look at the After all, if you want a suit of clothes that costs so 
anatomy of a woman. The things that she carries in much money, you can't buy that suit of clothes until 
front of her chest are not decorative objects. They're to you have that much money. Is that correct? Otherwise 
be used by babies. She has a function. And to rear you'll have to do without the suit of clothes. You're 
that child takes an awful lot of ingenuity. You've got to going to get a suit of clothes that's going to cost half 
use your brain. You've got to do a lot of reading and as much. But you're going to get for half as much what 
studying to keep up. It's a big responsibility to provide is worth half as much and what will wear only half as 
an environment that is clean and lofty for the long as the other, you see. So, anyone can contract a 
individual. Taking care of the clothing of the husband marriage which at its very inception has a shaky 
and the kids should never be looked upon as menial. It foundation. When I was a kid, we 
should be a lovely opportunity to serve others. She 

always used to say that unless we have thousands of dollars in the bank and a living wage, we can't ever think of marriage. In those days we never thought in terms of a wife going to work. A wife's place was in the home to take care of the home and the family. This was recognized. 
Nowadays, a man who cannot support a family unit will engage in a marriage with a sense of semi-responsibility. He thinks, well, hell, my wife will help me out. She'll go to work. There's where the trouble starts. Now, where is the burden of responsibility? Instead of cooking a fine meal at home, she has to run to the canned goods, and she isn't feeding her family well. Their resistance will go down. They'll be sick more often if they're average people. If the husband or she is built like a bull, they have more strength to resist a deteriorating diet. Because to cook a fine meal you need time. She hasn't that time if she has to go to work. What about keeping the apartment clean? Her responsibilities are tripled in going to work. And the man usually expects her to carry that burden which is ridiculous. 
So long as he works and she works, it's got to be a fifty-fifty job all the way through. But somehow the woman is sacked with the major burden of the responsibility. This becomes fatiguing, and you find their nerves become pretty sore, and they quarrel more. They misunderstand more, unless, one is of a nature which will always give in for the sake of maintaining the relationship. But it will take its toll in time. Something will break down some time. The best relationship can exist when the family gets real nourishment ... And giving the family real nourishment is a big job for the imagination: preparing a meal, setting it at night appetizingly. There isn't anything like having a real home life for a man and a woman instead of slapping things out of a can, here, there, chomping down, sitting down, gulping it and hopping over to the T.V. What the hell kind of a life is that? My heavens! When the man knows that the woman is dedicated to the home, to the kids, to him and to their common objectives and vice versa, there is a wonderful feeling of well-being. The woman doesn't have a career. 
Now, of course, there are some women who do excel in ability, and they want to eat their cake and have it. They want their families, and they also want their careers. Well, a great deal of friction will occur between a man and a woman which they will have to put up with. And, usually, they end up leading separate lives. They tolerate each other, but they're not really, really happy. I don't know why a woman would ever want to compete with a man. Why would she want to abandon womanhood? No more than a man should abandon manhood . 
But Baba didn't make any specific points on these things. It was understood that a woman, when she became a wife and had children, was responsible for their care. And the man had to provide for all of them as best he could. They each had their place. But 

Baba never objected to women pursuing business or professional lives. If a woman is not going to be mar≠ried, as in the case of those whom Baba ordered to be celibate, she has to go into business because there is no one to support her. She must go into business and pursue a career because she is not to be married. I'm thinking now of two or three of them. They are not to be married, and they are to lead celibate lives. So they had to go to business. But I wouldn't say they're following a career. What they're doing is following a program for self-preservation. They have to live. And they're supporting themselves in that living. 
But those who lived near Baba pretty much came to understand that when a woman became a wife and a mother, her place was at home to rear that family and take care of the man and provide a home for all, adequately. Because at the root of all this career business with women is nothing but egotism, conceit, and being given the wrong view about marriage by parents or friends in the early part of their lives. I think it's a real heck of a job to be a wife and a mother. It's a powerful job to perform. It takes an awful lot of ingenuity. That's the way I feel about it. With Baba, if a woman were to be kept single, it was alright for her to go and earn her liyelihood. And that, in itself, in India, is a radical shift from the past. Because in India those connected with the middle class or the upper bracket families never sent their women to work. They had to be provided for by the head of the household. I'm thinking now of Sarosh's daughter, Freni. She was in her early twenties, and she felt that so long as she wasn't getting married, at that time anyway, she wanted to go to work. Her father absolutely forbade it. Since when does a daughter of a prosperous Parsee family go to business? It's unheard of. So she came to Baba with the problem, and, yes, she could take a job. He permitted her. And she's working for the Air India airlines. So Baba, in giving her the permission to go careerwise, broke a very solid precedent in∑ India, you see. So long as she is single, the woman can pursue the business career or the professional career. But if you are married, and there are children, you've got to be home to raise that family. That was an automatic understanding I believe. I think that makes it clear, doesn't it? 
