Sunday, October 7, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven. Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ. From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto His disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. Then said Jesus unto His disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works. Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom." (Mat. 16:13-28.)  Beloved, there is a line of crystal-clear cases, that speak with brevity and clarity and universal simplicity -- all to the effect that our dear Lord Jesus will leave the glories of the Third Heaven with an innumerable host of mighty angels and all His glorified saints in their new bodies --  bound to judge in wrath and fury and vengeance for wrongs committed against His people who are  kept as the apple of His eye. For example: "When the Son of man shall come in His glory, and  all the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory, and before Him shall be gathered all nations..."(Mat. 25:31-32) i.e., all individuals of mankind, from Adam to  the end of the world, the times of Restitution of all things in the absolute sense. And thereupon all  mankind will be finally judged by Jesus Christ.  "Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead." (Acts 17:31)  "And he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and journeyed toward Jerusalem. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them" -- (Good question, and note, that only "one" put the question; but Jesus answered "them.") -- "Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are: Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and  Sunday, October 7, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know  you not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and  gnashing of teeth when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the  kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out. And they shall come from the east, and from  the west, and from the north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.  And, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last. The same  day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get thee out, and depart hence: for  Herod will kill thee." (Lk. 13:22-31.)  "Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David? But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand: and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand?" (Matt. 12:22-26)  Our dear Lord Jesus became a partaker of flesh and blood so that he might redeem His elect from among mankind, and destroy the Devil; to wit: "Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." (Heb. 2:14-18.)  Beloved, there is a passage of Scripture consisting of at least four strictures that ought to terrify the nominal Christian as much as the out-and-out heathen; to wit: 1.) He that is not with me is against me; 2.) The sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven; 3.) Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment; and, 4.) For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned. Take them up, seriatim; to wit: It will come as a major surprise on the Great and Dreadful Judgment Day, that the great masses of mankind are going to spend all eternity in Hell not only because they did not join the world-wide full-time evangelistic efforts of Westboro Baptist Church -- but that they also undertook to destroy the ministry of Westboro Baptist Church. Listen: "He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." (Matt. 12:30.) I put it to you, Beloved. Could words be more plain and simple? As Paul stood by and held the coat of the killers of the gentle Stephen (Acts 7:60), so you have joined the mob that bombed WBC, set WBC on fire in the middle of the night, slashed WBC's tires, beat WBC's unresisting members, all while WBC evangelists were engaged in peaceful Gospel preaching. Your duty these last 20+ years was to "gather" the harvest of souls by faithful preaching -- you did the exact opposite! You "scattered abroad." WBC has kept careful documentation as to hundreds of your said criminal acts against WBC. Remember the plain and simple words of our dear Lord Jesus: "He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." (Matt. 12:30.)  Sunday, October 7, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  This is the command of Jesus Christ, the Almighty Son of God -- binding on every son and  daughter of Adam since the world began. Is it nothing to you that the Lord Jesus Christ calls you a nest of vipers? That He who knows you, better than anyone else -- every thought, word, and deed -- cradle to grave; to wit:  "For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:12-16)  Now let Him speak who is qualified in every way to address matters of the human heart; to wit: "O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man (none but God's Elect) out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things; and an evil man (none but God's Non-Elect) out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things." Beloved, we must keep our Holy Commission in constant view. The short of it is that our Father has prepared us to go into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, and has commissioned Westboro Baptist Church to baptize every mature believer in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever He has taught us; and, the dear Lord Jesus has promised to be with us, empower us, and even to the end of the world. The language of our commission is plain and simple and unmistakable: What we bind on earth will be bound in Heaven; what we loose on earth will be loosed in Heaven. "He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me (God the Son) despiseth Him that sent me." (Lk. 10:16.) "When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked His disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven." (Matt. 16:13-19)  "He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me. And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name." (Lk. 10:16,17) "We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error." (1 Jn. 4:6)  Sunday, October 7, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved, let us examine the "speech-sin" issue more closely. It will involve expounding relevant  passages of Scripture; to wit: "Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall  be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men."(Mat. 12:31.) (We are clearly dealing with the unforgiveable sin; a sin of mere words and  speech. Somebody has erected a huge billboard in a pricey location in the southwest area of town,  arguing that there is no sin so grievous as to be unforgiveable by a loving God. For years now we  have been preaching that, as a practical matter, no homosexual can be saved, because no  homosexual can repent, because no homosexual will accept the proposition that sodomy is a sin  that needs repenting of, and rather needs to be practiced, and enjoyed. Beloved, everybody in the world -- any religion or no religion -- from every nation, kindred, tongue and tribe -- jolly-well knows, whether he will admit it or not -- that nobody will make it to Heaven without repenting of  his sins, confessing his sins, and abandoning his sins.) Comes now Mr. Sodomite, fornicating his  eyeballs out with Mr. Gomorrah. Speaking of the huge billboard in the pricey part of town, I would bet a nickel some rich fag had something to do with its erection. That's how those perverts  roll. Their disposable income is huge, too; because they have no kids to support, and two or more incomes to squander. And they know no shame -- being unable to blush for their filthiness; to wit:  "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord. Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk therein." (Jer. 6:15-17)  Furthermore, these abominable, same-sex fornicators lead the hard speeches of the damned in the last days, "Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire... But, Beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; How that they told you there would be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts." (Jude 7,17-18). Beloved, there is a passage in the third chapter of Isaiah that tells all mankind what God thinks of the curse of the Sodomite. There are so many good, plain Bible declarations about sodomites in God's Holy Word, that there simply is no possible excuse for any person to be misled. For more than twenty years this humble church has saturated the inhabited earth with those Bible passages, such that everyone could be a PhD on the subject. You, my willingly ignorant friend, are either a fag or a fag enabler -- and you are on your way to Hell.  I will leave you with one more remarkable passage. The Leper must cry, UNCLEAN ! when approaching any one, under the Mosaic Code, to warn of danger. (Lev. 13:45) It was left up to the leper, to initiate the warning. But in the case of the filthy sodomite, God could not trust the morally corrupt creature to warn mankind of his approach; and so God Himself stamped the sin of Sodom upon every fag countenance: "The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. Say ye to the righteous that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their doings." (Isa. 3:9,10) I love you. Amen.  
