 Do You Have To Be Practical In Order to Be Just?
  
January 17, 2010 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 Welcome, Centering, Kindling, 

Opening Words 

 
We are here, 

after a week of melting snow, 

to worship, to join the stories of our lives 

to the larger Story of our common life, 

where we share our wholeness and brokenness, 

our hopes, our dreams and our strength. 

 
And so, 
mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, 
we begin our celebration together by kindling our p
romise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on earth. 
 
Ingathering Story, Announcements, Affirmation: 

(C. Eric Lincoln)
  
Responsibility without power is slavery. Power with
out responsibility is tyranny. 
 
Hymn #157  
Step by Step the Longest March 
can be won, can be won. Many stones can form an arc
h, singly, none, singly none. Yet by union, 
what we will, can be accomplished still; drops of w
ater turn a mill, singly none, singly none. 
 
Sequence 

 
Many stones can form an arch. 

Singly none. Singly none. 

Yet when the earth shakes, 

arches collapse, ceilings cave. 

Neither singly nor together,  

we cannot stop the earth from shaking.  

Yet singly 
and
 together, we can,  
even from this distance,  

hold people who are shaking in fear 

in our arms, with fresh solidarities made possible 

by our technological age. 

Drops of water turn a mill,  

singly none, singly none. 

Yet when drops of water form floods instead, 

coast-lines drown, cities break. 

The more comfortable may then offer their 

 pretty slogans about the meaning of life, 

but others will struggle to just stay alive, 

washing away all comfortable philosophies 

with those drops of water called tears. 

Oh Love, life is tough sometimes. And I know 

I have no control over the shifts of earth and air,
 fire and water. 

And I have no control over my upbringing, 

and none over the surprises of my life,  

surprises both good or ill. I find myself saying  

?Oh, how I want to be free!?   

So come now, Love, nestle with me in this silence, 
 so that I might find, in the realization of how lit
tle I really control,  
a spiritual freedom Iôve never quite known until no
wñ. 
silence 
 
Step by step the longest march can be won, can be w
onñthe paths of our individual lives, I 
mean, where we are joined by companions early and l
ate in our length of lives, companions who 
march by our side, those we love, those we admire, 
those who suffer with us when we suffer, 
those who challenge us and forgive us, and those wh
om we forgive.  May we feel free to bring 
them into our time of worship by seeing their faces
 in our hearts, or saying their names quietly 
into the silenceñ.  

 naming 
 
Step by step, drop by drop, person by person, note 
by note, the music of life moves forward, as 
the spiritual grounding of our lives turns itself i
nto song. 
  

Readings 

 
The First Reading 
is taken from a speech given by Caroline Severance 
to the Womenôs 
Parliament of Los Angeles. She was 80 years old at 
the time, and finally retiring. Caroline 
Severance was the founder of the Unitarian Church o
f Los Angeles, an abolitionist, suffragist, 
and founder of kindergartens. She and her husband s
pent many years in northern Ohio, in 
Cleveland, and they raised their children there. 

 
Dear Friends:ä I count it a great privilege to be o
ne of  you. It is because of you and such as 
youä both men and womenä who face your duties and r
esponsibilities fearlessly, that we are 
justified in our high hopes. But there is still muc
h to be done to make life worth living for the 
mass of our fellows.  

 
I place justice before charity. And while we must, 
and do, recognize the need of charity under 
our present conditions, let us look for and labor  

for the time when industry will be so organized as 
to make sure that no man, woman or child, in 
our broad, bountiful land, shall be homeless and he
lpless; when each shall have the certainty  

 of work and of the just reward which insures all th
e needed opportunities for the home, for 
education, and for development.  Surely this much i
s the birthright of every child of God and of 
every individual of a free people. Never will our l
and be a civilized country until this is brought 
about by those who believe that the Golden Rule is 
the only just basis for business and for 
political activities.  

 
 
The Second Reading
 consists of excerpts from a much longer article of 
the Rev. Martin Luther 
King Jr., written for Ebony Magazine, their May 4, 
1966 issue. 
 
I am convinced that for practical as well as moral 
reasons, nonviolence offers the only road to 
freedom.   

This is not time for romantic illusions about freed
om and empty philosophical debate. What is 
needed is a strategy for change, a tactical program
.  So far, this has only been offered by the 
nonviolent movement. 

Our record of achievement through nonviolent action
 is already remarkable. The dramatic social 
changes which have been made across the South are u
nmatched in the annals of history. Even 
more remarkable is the fact that this progress occu
rred with a minimum loss of life. 
Not a single person has been killed in a nonviolent
 demonstration. The bombings of the 16th 
Street Baptist Church occurred several months after
 demonstrations stopped. Rev. James Reeb, 
Mrs. Viola Liuzzo and Jimmie Lee Jackson were all m
urdered at night following demonstrations. 
And fewer people have been killed in ten years of a
ction across the South than were killed in 
three nights of rioting in Watts.   

It is always amusing to me when a man says that he 
can't demonstrate with us because if 
someone hit him he would fight back. Here is a man 
whose children are being plagued by rats 
and roaches, whose wife is robbed daily at overpric
ed ghetto food stores, who himself is working 
for about two-thirds the pay of a white person doin
g a similar job and with similar skills, and in 
spite of all this daily suffering it takes someone 
spitting on him to make him want to fight. It is as
 
ridiculous to raise the question of self-defense in
 relation to nonviolence as it is for a soldier on 
the battlefield to say he is not going to take any 
risks.   
I must continue by (this) faith: violence, even in 
self-defense, creates more problems than it 
solves. Only a refusal to hate or kill can put an e
nd to the chain of violence in the world and lead 
us toward a community where men (and women) can liv
e together without fear. Our goal is to 
create a beloved community, and this will require a
 qualitative change in our souls as well as a 
quantitative change in our lives. 

Our most powerful nonviolent weapon is, as would be
 expected, also our most demanding: that 
is organization. To produce change, people must be 
organized to work together in units of power.  
More and more, the civil rights movement will becom
e engaged in the task of organizing people 
into permanent groups to protect their own interest
s and to produce change in their behalf. This 
is a tedious task which may take years, but the res
ults are more permanent and meaningful. 

 There is no easy way to create a world where men an
d women can live together, where each has 
his or her own job and house, where all children re
ceive as much education as their minds can 
absorb. But if such a world is created in our lifet
ime, it will be done in the United States by 
people of good will. It will be accomplished by per
sons who have the courage to put an end to 
suffering by willingly suffering themselves rather 
than inflict suffering upon others. It will be 
done by rejecting the racism, materialism and viole
nce that has characterized Western 
civilization and especially by working toward a wor
ld of cooperation and peace. 
 
Sermon 

 
In our story earlier this morning, the scent of blo
oming roses was used by the author as a way of 
illustrating how extraordinary historical eventsñli
ke one of the non-violent marches organized 
by Dr. King, Bayard Rustin and othersñsweetly scent
 the very atmosphere of our lives.  History 
is not something tucked away in the pages of books;
 it surrounds us in the very air we breathe.  
 
For example, as some of you know, I live on Rich St
reet, downtown. And remarkable history 
scents the very air I breathe when I am home. For e
xample, the great American artist, George 
Bellows, whose work I love, and whose influential c
anvasses are found in museums all around 
the world, including our own, was born just a block
 away from where my building now stands on 
Rich St. And just two blocks beyond that, toward Hi
gh, youôll find one of those bronze historical 
plaques commemorating the first kindergarten in the
 USA. Louisa Frankenberg, a German 
immigrant, established the kindergarten here among 
the German-speaking population all the way 
back in 1838. She had studied with the inventor of 
the idea back in Germany, and when she 
moved here to Columbus to live with immigrating fam
ily members, she started a school where 
little children could sing, and dance and explore t
he world together, and begin to learn who they 
were through the experimentation we now call play. 

 
Some historians deny that Louisaôs school was a ?re
al? kindergarten, whatever that means. But I 
beg to differ. When the great Unitarian Elizabeth P
eabody founded the first English language 
kindergarten in American a few decades later, she d
id not hesitate to honor Louisa Frankenberg 
as a foremother by seeking her out, and spending ti
me with her when she was an aged invalid.  
 
Strange as it may seem, the organized education of 
children of whatever age was a brand new 
idea back then, and Unitarians, as you might imagin
e, championed it. Unitarians like Horace 
Mann championed the first public schools, and women
 like Elizabeth Peabody and Caroline 
Severance championed the education of much younger 
children, believing itôs never too early to 
learn, to grow, to develop, to play, to start. Toda
y, our own congregation features the 
School for 
Young Children,
 a modern, even more refined version of what Franke
nberg, Peabody and 
Severance began. 

 
After a long and remarkable life, Caroline Severanc
e moved to Los Angeles, to be closer to her 
sons and grandchildren. Finding no Unitarian Church
 there, she established one, which still 
exists, and in which I have preached. Over time, sh
e grew a powerful and legendary presence in 
the womenôs communities and clubs in Los Angeles, h
er years of establishing kindergartens, her 
work back East for the vote and for the abolition o
f slavery garnering her huge respect all 

 around. The speech you heard quoted today was deliv
ered by Ms. Severance when she was 80 
years old. In the middle section of the speech, she
 offers us an amazing tour-de-force visionary 
portrait of justice, which I must read to you again
:  ?I place justice before charity. And while we 
must, and do, recognize the need of charity under o
ur present conditions, let us look for and 
labor for the time when industry will be so organiz
ed as to make sure that no man, woman or 
child, in our broad, bountiful land, shall be homel
ess and helpless; when each shall have the 
certainty of work and of the just reward which insu
res all the needed opportunities for the home, 
for education, and for development.? 

 
This great vision of an inclusive nation, energized
, as she said later in her speech, by the wisdom 
of the ?Golden Rule,? was not a conclusion she came
 to only later in life. Many decades earlier, 
in the 1840ôs, when she and her husband Theodoric l
eft their particular church up in Ohio to 
found a congregation which eventually was served by
 Unitarian ministers, she explained: 
?We 
could no longer sit conscientiously under a preache
r, or in a fellowship, where the golden rule of 
Christianity was not recognized as applicable to al
l, whatever the color of their skin, or crinkle, 
or non-crinkle of their hair."  

 
More than a hundred years later, Martin Luther King
 Jr. shared a visionñhe called it a dreamñ
 with 19
th
 century people like Caroline Severance. Many of yo
u will remember that he said 
something that, coincidently I suppose, even echoed
 a phrase of Ms. Severance: ?I have a dream 
that my four little children will one day live in a
 nation where they will not be judged by 
the 
color of their skin
, but by the content of their character.?  
 
Having a dream of justice-for-all, like King or Sev
erance does not, however, mean you have a 
sheet of instructions in your hand as to how you mi
ght fulfill that dream. 
 
So Dr. King had to create one. Now Dr. King was ins
pired by the practices of Mahatma Gandhi 
in India. And Gandhi was himself inspired by the te
achings of the Russian novelist and utopian, 
Tolstoi; and by Henry David Thoreau, who was raised
 in the Unitarian Church of Concord; and 
by the Universalist utopian pacifist, Adin Ballou. 
And all of these men came to the conclusion 
that if you beat your dream over someoneôs headñif 
you think your dream needs to be imposed 
by violence on one and all, then you will never, an
d I mean never, see your dream realized. 
Instead, each of these thinkers taught that non-vio
lence was the only approach that had any 
chance of success. 

 
In his May 4, 1966 essay for Ebony, King rightly is
 proud of his success. ?Our record of 
achievement through nonviolent action is already re
markable. The dramatic social changes, 
which have been made across the South, are unmatche
d in the annals of history. Even more 
remarkable is the fact that this progress occurred 
with a minimum loss of life.? 
He does mention a few deathsñlike the Unitarian min
ister from All Souls Church in D.C., 
James Reeb, and Viola Liuzzo who was active in the 
Universalist Church on Cass Ave. in 
Detroit, but he points out that they didnôt die dur
ing his non-violent marches, but in cowardly 
attacks at night when they were isolated from the h
uge marching crowds. 
But what interests me most is his use of the word ?
practical.? Non-violent means are ?practical,? 

 he says. And, he adds solemnly, ?the ONLY road to f
reedom.? 
King wrote many sermons (which is a very peculiar k
ind of writing) and books based on the 
philosophy and theology he learned in grad school. 
But the ?essay? format in a popular magazine 
provided him with a chance to say things with a ton
e I had never found elsewhere in all of his 
written materials. In his Ebony essay, he does some
thing that the teacher Jesus used to do, which 
is to take a criticism, and then to ?burlesque? it.
 In other words, he tosses the critique back into 
the face of the critic with exaggerated flourish. R
emember what he said? 
?It is always amusing 
to me when a man says that he can't demonstrate wit
h us because if someone hit him, he would 
fight back. Here is a man whose children are being 
plagued by rats and roaches, whose wife is 
robbed daily at overpriced ghetto food stores, who 
himself is working for about two-thirds the 
pay of a white person doing a similar job and with 
similar skills, and in spite of all this daily 
suffering it takes someone spitting on him to make 
him want to fight. It is as ridiculous to raise 
the question of self-defense in relation to nonviol
ence as it is for a soldier on the battlefield to 
say he is not going to take any risks.? 

 
What does it take, I hear him asking, to get disenf
ranchised people to demand their place at the 
table? What does it take to get people to be allies
 in this work, to find the place in them willing to
 
fight non-violently for what is right? 

Really? he asks. You have to be spit on? Someone ha
s to call you a name? 
Then
 you want to 
make a fist and knock someoneôs block off?  

But King reasserts that knocking peopleôs blocks of
f accomplishes nothing. In fact, it makes 
things worse. 
?I must continue by (this) faith,?
 he insists. 
?Violence, even in self-defense, creates 
more problems than it solves. Only a refusal to hat
e or kill can put an end to the chain of 
violence in the world.?  
 Itôs a hard ideal for many. I understand. But look,
 I donôt think for one minute that King 
or 
anyone
 comes to a place of non-violent action, or embrace
s the commitment to not hate, because 
they are superior people from birth, and are speaki
ng from a holy righteousness that looks down 
on others as unenlightened fools and hypocrites. I 
assure you, anyone who has learned not to hate 
has hated first, and pried that hate from around th
eir heart deliberately, finger by finger. And 
slowly. Anyone who chooses 
not
 to use violence, or even kill, when violence is us
ed upon them, 
has experienced their own blood running hot and mur
derous first. 
But then this, I have to believe, is why King insis
ted that non-violence is 
practical
. Because it 
begins with where people are. It doesnôt rely on au
thority, either personal or scriptural. It doesnôt 
rely on shame, finger-pointing or blame, all of whi
ch are forms of violence. It does not begin 
from a place of achieved perfection. The non-violen
t protest is not about forcing others to change 
the law, cease their own hatred or reform their own
 heart because they simply have to. No, itôs 
about presenting a dream, a vision clearly, saying:
 ?We think this is right,? and then, patiently, 
and without hatred, working to help others find tha
t dream for themselves, and see that vision 
from their own standpoint.  

 True, King expressed his belief in non-violence aft
er some laws had already been changed in the 
Ç50s. And yes, laws will be perceived by some as a 
form of force. But King, I believe, would 
have said something like this (and youôre right, th
is is the cheekiest thing I have ever done in a 
sermon!): 
The law is what we agree to live byñthe law itself 
stands against violence for the most 
part, and punishes violent law-breakers, so in some
 ways, it is not really parallel to the kind of 
force used by the people who want to use lynching a
s their method of maintaining control. So if 
some black students in the 1950s, by force of law, 
can now attend a school once reserved for 
whites alone in Little Rock Arkansas, then, yes, se
gregationists will feel that their values have 
been forced to the mat and will feel resentment. Bu
t I think that as long as the law protects 
everyone, instead of just the white crowd, the mora
l claims proposed by the later non-violent 
marches I led during the sixties would have worked 
even back in the fifties, were I ready to lead 
marches back then, and the same change in Little Ro
ck could have been more quickly welcomed 
by almost everyone, without having to be enforced b
y the National Guard amid cries of ?Lynch 
them!?  

And when I compare Kingôs whole organizational styl
e of justice-making with the kind of stuff 
that goes on a lot in my life today, I get frazzled
. He said: 
Our most powerful nonviolent weapon 
is, as would be expected, also our most demanding: 
that is organization. To produce change, 
people must be organized to work together in units 
of power.  More and more, the civil rights 
movement will become engaged in the task of organiz
ing people into permanent groups to 
protect their own interests and to produce change i
n their behalf. This is a tedious task which 
may take years, but the results are more permanent 
and meaningful. 
Today, I often get calls to show up for a protest o
f some sort or another ?tomorrow.? And itôs 
very clear that there has been little preparation, 
or organization except the easy kind available 
todayña mass email invitation to show up, with the 
assumption that I know all of the realities 
involved just because I am self-labeled as ?progres
sive.? To work together in ?units of power? 
takes a lot more organization than that. I know tha
t our own Racial Diversity Task Force is 
working to be one of those more ?permanent groups? 
King described, a group working for 
?results more permanent and meaningful,? and that K
ingôs vision of non-violence gladdens their 
hearts. Furthermore, social justice work takes what
 King calls ?a qualitative change in our 
soulsñ?  ñthat is, we have to examine our own role 
in the troubles of the world, and not 
assume that we are finished, righteously just once 
and for all, and can lecture the rest of the 
world on how to be more like us. Soul-work and just
ice-work, that is, humility and vision, 
overlap almost completely, I say. 

King believed that non-violent and undeniably tedio
us organization leads to more permanent 
results. I agree. And I agree with him that non-vio
lent social justice work is 
practical
. Why? 
Because it acknowledges that, in the world of the s
pirit, we are all still in a kind of kindergarten, 
learning by experience and experiment more than by 
authority and book. We are learning by 
practice, and that is all that Kingôs ?practical? m
eansñlike his non-violent marchers, we learn 
about making Golden Rule dreams come true by practi
ce. Social justice work, you see, is 
spiritual workñpractice, practice, practice. 

And we are practicing to live in history right now,
 not because something famous, like the 
founding of the first kindergarten, 
happened
 on our street once upon a time, but because we 

 ourselves 
are making
 history that will one day be read about by our chi
ldrenôs children. 
What, I wonder, will they read?  

Offering 

 
Drops of water turn a mill, singly none, singly non
e. Knowing this to be true, we set aside a 
portion of the service for those who prefer to cont
ribute their pledges to the congregational 
common budget during the Sunday celebration, instea
d of electronically or by mail. Giving and 
receiving both are deeply spiritual activities, and
 with this one act, since this congregation is 
entirely self supporting, we both give and receive.
  
  

Prayer 

 
Free to be, oh Love.  

Free to be.  

At least that. 

But also, free from shame  

that I am not someone else.   

And, free to make mistakes. Lots of Çem. 

Free to not think I am beyond forgiveness. 

Free to say ?I really donôt know.? 

Free from wishing that struggle and random sufferin
g would not be ordinary parts of life. 
Free from the inner voice that shuts me up 

when I need to speak up. 

Free from the belief that impulse is more 

authentic than planning. 

Free from thinking I have all the answers. 

Or that anyone else does, for that matter. 

Free from feeling competitive with, or more righteo
us than, the next person. 
Free from thinking that my freedom, 

and not justice for all, is the goal. 

Free to sing or not sing as I choose. 

But freeñat least that. Thanks. Amen. 

 
 
 
