

Question Baba Answers 

SERIES BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Question

 Can some idea be had of what sound is like from higher planes? Does it in any way differ in intensity or frequency of vibration from the sound of the physical plane? Answer

    This is rather difficult to explain and still more difficult to understand, as it relates to subjective experience. How≠ever, know this that sound obtains throughout all the seven planes differ≠ing in its expression of feeling and bliss. 

The sound, sight or smell of the higher planes can, with no stretch of imagination, be likened to what we are used to on the physical plane. It is something altogether different in nature, quality and expression, but, all the same, for the sake of description and analogy, we can do no better than use the familiar terms, viz., sound, sight and smell. Our physical organs of hearing, seeing and smelling are useless for experiencing and enjoying the higher planes. Therein it is a different eye that sees, a different ear that hears, and a different nose that smells. You know already that there are inner senses, a counterpart of the external senses in man, and it is the former that experiences the higher planes. 

Avoiding the mistake of likening the sound of the higher planes as some≠thing differing in intensity and fre≠quency of vibrations to the sound of the physical plane, know it for a certainty that there is actually what may be cal1ed 'sound' in the first three planes. The form, beauty, music and bliss of this sound is beyond description. The nad or celestial music (sound) is peculiar to the first plane and can be experienced or induced by the mantric force. It is on account of this that even an unintelligent repetition or reading of scriptures is encouraged and advocated. As stated above, although there is sound in all the seven planes, it is smell that is peculiar to the second and third planes; and sight belongs to the fifth and sixth planes. In the 



 

fourth plane the bliss of sound, smell and sight are all subdued and repressed. The fourth plane connotes the darkest night of the spiritual journey wherein even Jesus could not but cry out: "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?" It is for this reason the wayfarer traversing the Path all alone, unaided by a Master, finding himself benighted and forlorn in the fourth plane, is very strongly tempted to make wrong use of his psychic powers of the three lower planes, culminating in the fourth as ' siddhis' (kashf-o-karmat). And what a fall this means! It means once again going through the chain of evolution right from the beginningóthe stone state. 

The seventh plane stands unique. The sound, sight and smell here is divine in essence and has no com≠parison to that emanating from the lower planes. In this plane one does not hear, smell or see, but becomes sound, smell and sight simultaneously and is divinely conscious about it. 

The different religious practices and the yogas, after establishing contact with the higher planes, induce experi≠ences peculiar to those planes. For instance, contacting the first plane (sound) engenders inspiration; the second and third planes (smell) begets intuition; the fifth and sixth (sight) gives illumination. The experience of the fifth and sixth, the Sufis term as 'maarefat' (gnosis). The seventh plane stands for Revelation and this, ac≠cording to Sufis, is Haqiqat (Reality). 

Question 

Will the material science, in the near or remote future, be able to probe into subtle and higher planes? At the present rate of scientific progress it ought to be possible, if there be continuity or point of fusion from the material to the subtle. Answer 

You are going into deeper waters. Now listen carefully. The soul, essen≠tially divine, infinite in existence, knowledge and bliss is, all by itself, the only Reality. Everything else exists only in imagination. The famous and oft repeated parable of the snake and rope will elucidate the point. The soul, somehow, imagined the rope to be the snake. This 


phase engendered fear which, to stretch  is obviously and distinctly apart from  

the simile further, we may call mind;  cloth and thread. The making of cloth  

the mind extended itself to grasp it  and coat from thread is easy and  

(snake); this is energy, and actually  possible, but the return of the coat and  

grappling it means body. Thus we see  cloth to the state of the original thread  

mind, energy, body, although all three  means the destruction and annihilation  

have no existence except in imagin≠ of the form and expression of both.  

ation, but in relation to each other they  Similarly the emanation of energy and  

are altogether distinct, separate and  matter from mind is automatic and  

independent. Although mind emanates  natural, but the return of matter and  

energy and energy in essence is mind,  energy to mind is almost impossible.  

nevertheless in expression and form  This return business is the beginning of  

both are distinct and apart. Similarly,  spirituality.  

body is the outcome of energy, and,  You must have felt by now your  

though identical in essence, the  question answered by realizing how  

function and formation is radically  impossible it is for science to probe the  

different and independent. To illustrate  subtle and higher planes. Science is, as  

the point let us take thread to be mind,  yet, a very long way off, it has up to  

and cloth made thereof to represent  now only touched the fringe of matter.  

energy, and clothing to signify body.  It may, at the most, touch the extreme  

The cloth here is of thread, but, in  limits of matter, but that will take ages.  

utility and form, is altogether different  And who can, till then, vouchsafe for  

from thread; the clothing, say a coat, is  the integrity of thisóthe present civili≠ 

from thread, but in form and expression  zation?  