 
  2008-1-13  Obstacles 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

on a grey Winter™s morn, to worship. 

Here we remember honestly, 

and envision a better world tenderly, 

knowing it™s best to remain faithful 

even though a thousand things block our path. 

And so we begin together in peace this way: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of 
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit 
may illumine our way, we have kindled this  

light as the sign of our circle of life and love.
 Sequence
  
Thus I have heard. 

I™ve heard that my own body resembles the universe 
of stars around me, and that the 
space between my molecules is vast, 

like the distance between the galaxies; 

I™ve heard that I am not much more  

than a puff of breath. 

But it doesn™t feel like that. 

And the slap of my hand to my hand 

when I clap 
feels
 completely solid.   
(clap) So be it. 

Thus I have heard. 

I™ve heard that the oxygen I breathe to live 

was once generated in a star, 

and that my blood and this oxygen I breathe 

shake hands every minute as they 

braid themselves into my very flesh. 

But it doesn™t feel like that. 

My pulse and my breathing are quiet 

and non-intrusive in my everyday life.  

I never notice them unless I choose to.  

They 
feel
 like part of my solidity. So be it. 
What I have heard is certainly true. 

But what I feel is also true at the same time. 

So now, before the altar of that paradox I now keep
 my silence for a time, breathing, 
pulsing and fully inhabiting the breath and small u
niverse that is myself. 
 
Silence 

 
 
  Thus I have heard. We are individuals, and we are e
ach precious. But it doesn™t always 
feel as if I am just an individual. It often feels 
as if I am a multitude, part of a circle of 
love and nurture and loss and life, which is itself
 very precious. I am unique, but I™m also 
connected to all that is, each part of which is uni
que. Thus, so I might reverence this 
truth, I set aside some time to name those within m
e whom I love and miss, aloud or in 
quietness, 
   naming
        So be it. 
 
Thus I have heard. Human beings are fragile, their 
breath a cobweb, their heartbeats 
fleeting. But it doesn™t feel like that. Music is w
oven of that supposedly flimsy breath and 
pulse, but it feels as enduring as the earth in spa
ce, and does not perish, even when it is 
finished. So be it. 

  The First Reading 
is by George Leonard, father of the human potential
 movement in 
California, former award winning editor for 

Look Magazine, where he wrote brilliant coverage of
 the civil rights movement. He is 
also a playwright, martial artist, jazz musician an
d a leader at the Esalen Center. 
 
Civilized societies need predictable, standardized 
human components.  The early states 
shaped them with the whip, but soon worked out tech
niques for internalizing the whip.  
As technology developed and specialization increase
d, a rigid system of formal education 
evolved, devoted to fixing individual behavior at a
 preordained point, thus effectively 
blocking the individual™s tendency to learn (change
, keep adapting) throughout all of life.  
This process contributes to personal dis-ease. 

 
Civilized societies needed individuals insensitive 
to their environment and to their own 
feelings.  Individuals who could sense and feel wha
t they were doing in the name of 
Civilization to nature and other people simply coul
d not keep on doing it.  So the social 
order set about turning off the sensitive ecologica
l sense developed over millions of years 
of mammalian and early human evolution.  By a varie
ty of conditioning techniques, 
human components were trained to ignore the message
s of the senses and distrust their 
own feelings.  The ideal civilized component is one
 who can keep on doing its task, at the 
same rate, regardless of its feelings, or of what i
s going on around it.   
 
Must we go on building, expanding, exploiting forev
er?  Obviously not.  The earth is a 
limited system. So we now are living in a world tha
t demands not Civilization, but 
Transformation. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from Survival: A Thematic Guide to Canadian L
iterature 
1972, by the great Margaret Atwood. A beloved Canad
ian poet, essayist and novelist, she 
was named Humanist of the Year by the Humanist Asso
ciation. Several of her works have 
been, or are being made, into film. Here she makes 
some famous comments on Canadian 
literature. 

  

A preoccupation with one's survival is necessarily 
also a preoccupation with the obstacles 
to that survival. In earlier writers these obstacle
s are external Œ the land, the climate, and 
so forth. In later writers the obstacles tend to be
come both harder to identify and more 

 
  internal; they are no longer obstacles to physical 
survival, to life as anything more than a 
minimally human being. Sometimes fear of these obst
acles becomes itself the obstacle, 
and a character is paralyzed by terror (either of w
hat he thinks is threatening him from the 
outside, or of elements in her own nature that thre
aten her from within). It may even be 
life itself that they fear; and when life becomes a
 threat to life, you have a moderately 
vicious circle.  

 
Sermon 

 
If you would like, you may think of this sermon as 
a preface for my sermon next week on 
Martin Luther King Jr. Sunday. After all, I will be
 speaking then of the vast and quite 
systemic obstacles here in the States which maintai
n unequal privileges for all persons of 
color, whether beige, saffron, brown, pink or taupe
. 
 
Or you might think of it as an example of psycholog
ist Carl Jung™s famous word 
?synchronicity,? since early this week I received t
hree written notes from members of the 
church, each of which used the word ?obstacles? in 
their text. Happily, each of the notes 
let me know that these obstacles were being success
fully tackled, one after another. 
 
Or you could just say this sermon is the story of l
ife in general. I say this because I was 
studying the classic structure of children™s storie
s this week.  Over and over I read how 
any really 
good
 children™s story must present a series of obstacle
s– for the main 
character to overcome in order to get to that joyou
s, wonderful and happily-ever-after life 
that we often unconsciously hold as the way life™s 
supposed to be. Whether it™s Vasalisa 
being forced to do chores for Babayaga, or Herakles
 having to complete his 12 labors, or 
the princess having to trick Rumplestiltskin, or ev
en Moses having to face the obstacle of 
Pharaoh™s hard heart, obstacles create stories we r
emember best.  No obstacles to a good 
life. No honest stories.  I certainly doubt that an
yone in this room, however happy, has 
lived an obstacle free life. 

 
Nevertheless, I also doubt whether there are many i
n this room who 
root
 for obstacles, 
who go out of their way to throw them in their own 
path, or who smile with glee every 
time an obstacle falls across the road. The word ?o
bstacle? is hardly a cuddly, warm and 
sweet-smelling word in our language. 

 
But since obstacles to a life of joy are universal,
 inescapable and rather constant, it might 
be good to turn around, face them and take a good l
ook. 
 
First, I notice that there are two kinds of obstacl
es. First, there are 
inconvenient
 obstacles. 
And second, there are 
consequential 
obstacles.  Examples of the first, or inconvenient 
obstacles, might include missing a flight because o
f mechanical or weather problems, 
delaying traffic jams, colds, flus, broken bones an
d sprained ankles, bureaucratic  
blunders, letters, or even bills, lost by the post 
office, two hour lines at the DMV, 
Kroger™s being all out of Pampers on Sunday evening
...all very annoying and frustrating. 
Incredibly inconvenient. But usually not permanent.
  
 
 
  Inconvenient obstacles may be surmounted. For examp
le, during the Sabbatical I took in 
1987, the one I mentioned last week, I had especial
ly looked forward to seeing the 
Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow, filled with magnificen
t Russian paintings almost unknown 
in the West. But when I surfaced from the subway an
d looked toward where it was 
supposed to be, it wasn™t there. Turns out they had
 to redo the foundation of the building 
for safety reasons, so they put all the paintings i
n storage for two years, and took the 
whole building down to the second basement foundati
on. What I discovered was a huge 
hole in the ground, not delicious paintings by Ge, 
Kramskoi and Repin. It was 
inconvenient and frustrating that I showed up at th
e exact worst time–and frankly, I 
doubt I will ever see it. No one just pops over to 
Moscow to see a museum. But, I am not 
destroyed. I am not permanently damaged, or doomed.
 I am not dead. I was just annoyed. 
The point is, however, they didn™t tear down the mu
seum just to annoy me. Inconvenient 
obstacles, you see, are usually 
accidental.
  
Now here is where it gets complicated. Because some
times something terribly frustrating 
does actually lead to death. And death 
is
 permanent. I think of the woman, Toyo 
Suyemoto Kawakami, Jim Bailey™s friend whom he reme
mbers today by the beauty of 
these chancel flowers. Toyo™s beloved son Kay died 
when he was only sixteen. He died 
of a totally unexpected reaction to a medication he
 was being given for allergies. No one 
intended to kill him. It was an accident of the wor
st kind. A chemical anomaly. Still, 
Shikata ga nai.
 ?It cannot be helped,? the Japanese American prove
rb goes. Toyo heard it 
a hundred times. It was an unfortunate accident. 

 
But now I want to offer you a clear example of the 
second kind of obstacle, the 
consequential 
obstacle. This is a systemic obstacle, and it alway
s leads, if not to death, 
but to enduring misery and tragedy. I think right a
way of the famous story of Romeo and 
Juliette. Two young people deeply smitten, or if yo
u want, in love, but each from rival 
families. The righteous parents of each teenager ar
e veritable terrorists, trying to control 
the lives of their aching children, until, by the e
nd of the tragic tale, four are dead, Tybalt, 
Paris, Romeo and Juliette. And just as with Toyo™s 
son Kay, there is no way to bring back 
the dead. 

 
But note, just as in the case of Toyo, the parents 
in the play did not 
intend
 that their 
children should die, any more than Kay™s horrified 
doctors intended to kill him. But, the 
Montagues and the Capulets allowed themselves to be
 caught up in a system of enmity, 
stubbornness, rivalry, strictness, competition, vio
lence, hatred and arrogance. These were 
not personal neurotic traits on the part of the fam
ilies, so much as a description of a 
whole system bigger than their combined clans, a fo
rm of ?civilization? which, by its 
competitive violence and capacity to demean, underm
ines its own health and dignity. 
 
But Romeo and Juliette are fictional folk, you say.
 Emblematic fiction yes, perhaps, but 
fiction.  

 
OK then, let™s return to the very un-fictional Toyo
 Suyemoto Kawakami, the woman who 
lost her son. She was an American citizen, born in 
that most American city, Sacramento, 
California before the end of the First World War. S
he eventually attended the University 

 
  of California at Berkeley, where she majored in Eng
lish. She actually didn™t know much 
Japanese at all, because her parents, young adult J
apanese immigrants, wanted her to 
grow up thoroughly American. She was a well-known w
riter and poet in the Bay Area. 
Then came Pearl Harbor. And immediately Toyo faced 
obstacles of systemic origin, with 
horrific consequence, consequences far more than in
convenient. She and her family were 
placed in a militarized camp in Utah, one of many s
uch camps set up for American 
citizens with Japanese ethnicity during the Second 
World War. They were there for the 
duration of the war. I have visited one of these ca
mps, Manzanar, in California, just down 
the road from where my friend Tom Ace lives. It™s b
een restored a bit, and they have put 
in a poignant museum which, frankly, kept me in tea
rs for two hours. 
  

This systemic violence against people who had commi
tted no crimes is one of the 
consequential obstacles I™m talking about. And the 
obstacles were solid and real. A 
barbed wire fence blocked their exit. The deprivati
on of their family homes and their 
livelihoods blocked the free flow of their spirit. 
The denial of their dignity was an 
obstacle to their life and peace long after they we
re released.  
 
The Manzanar museum, run by the National Park Syste
m, interestingly enough, is 
courageous enough to admit what I just said. They f
reely admit that the Japanese 
interment camps were tragic obstacles to freedom, d
ignity and life, and that, as a 
consequence, they sign a deep betrayal of the Ameri
can spirit. They were landmarks of 
sheer bigotry. 

 
Are there other consequential and largely unconscio
us systems threaded through our 
American civilization that serve as obstacles to a 
good and joyous and happy life? Yes, 
indeed. 

 
Why, for example, do some have health coverage, and
 others literally die for lack of it? 
What is the difference between those who see a doct
or and get medication and those who 
can™t get to a doctor or pay for medication?  Are t
hose with health coverage better people 
than those without? Look, I don™t need Roger Moore 
to make a movie about this–I just 
have to open my email, or call a friend or two, to 
find more than enough tragic evidence 
for this obstacle. 

 
Or what are the systemic obstacles to a good secula
r education? Education in grade 
school, high school, college–all forms of school.  
Is it the system of religious 
entitlement, growing more severe every day blocking
 the path: ?No child of mine is 
going to hear from a godless teacher that we come f
rom monkeys.?  Or is it a matter of 
economics–wealthy suburbs have cool schools, poor i
nner cities often have schools 
without books or supplies. And how can anyone affor
d higher education now? I couldn™t 
even afford to go to the seminary I attended once, 
and I am not destitute. What are the 
other systemic obstacles that keep all children, no
 matter where they live, from getting a 
good education? 

 
The continuing racialization of this country, even 
though ?race? has no biological reality, 
is another example, as is the distorted nature of o
ur prison system, shaped by the pathetic 

 
  sin-and-redemption model of human nature. And then,
 there is the whole ecological mess 
of the present age.  

 
These are exactly the kind of consequential obstacl
es which George Leonard outlined in 
the first reading. Civilization itself, he says, th
e overarching system that binds us all, 
becomes itself the chief obstacle in the world, ?ef
fectively blocking the individual™s 
tendency to learn (change, keep adapting) throughou
t all of life.?    
 
He goes on. Brilliantly. ?Civilized societies neede
d individuals 
insensitive to their 
environment
, and 
to their own feelings. 
 Individuals who 
could
 sense and feel what they 
were doing, in the name of Civilization, to nature,
 and other people, 
simply could not 
keep on doing it. 
 So the social order set about turning off the sens
itive ecological sense 
developed over millions of years of–evolution.  By 
a variety of conditioning techniques, 
human (beings) were trained to ignore the messages 
of their own senses and distrust their 
own feelings.  The ideal civilized citizen, he conc
ludes, ?is one who can keep on doing its 
task, 
regardless of its feelings, or of what™s going on a
round it.
?   
 
Exactly. Then he adds that the human race does not 
need a 
civilization 
which promotes 
some and allows others to perish, but rather, it ne
eds a transformation so that all might 
live a good and happy life. And I think Mr. Leonard
 gave us a clear indication as to how 
such a transformation might come about. Human being
s have to disengage from 
any part 
of the social system
 which numbs their feelings, 
so that they can begin to feel things 
again.
 Feel what? Feel revulsion at what we are doing to 
the environment, day-by-day, 
year-by-year. Feel revulsion at the use of bloody w
ar, race politics, and religious certainty 
as systems for maintaining privilege and power.  It
™s not only an intellectual analysis we 
need, in his words for example: ?The world is a clo
sed system?; but we need a 
renewed 
sensitivity
 toward our environment and our fellow creatures, h
uman and otherwise. The 
mind can describe the wounded world, but it takes h
eart to respond to the wounds, and 
the heart™s strength to begin to bring healing to a
 broken world. The transformation 
Leonard calls for, therefore, seems to be a spiritu
al one. 
 
Margaret Atwood remembers when the obstacles we fac
ed were just things like land, 
forests and rivers. But over time, our inner fears,
 our self-doubt, and our sense of 
overwhelm became obstacles to a life of joy. She co
ncludes that sometimes we can be our 
own worst enemies, because ?sometimes the fear of t
hese (psychological) obstacles 
becomes itself the obstacle, and? we become ?paraly
zed by terror. It may even be life 
itself that? we ?fear; and when life becomes a thre
at to life, you have a–
vicious circle.?  
 
How can life itself become a threat? Easy.  By maki
ng the poor assumption that a good 
life has no obstacles, or very few of them or just 
shouldn™t have them at all. Or by making 
the assumption that there are easy ways around the 
obstacles and that nobody has to 
suffer all this California nonsense of feeling thei
r feelings or making changes in their life. 
?Oh, don™t worry, they™ll invent a cheap electric c
ar, and then it will all come back to 
normal.? Or, to use that painfully witty metaphor o
f Lew Welch: ?Don™t worry, we™ll find 
that flashlight and then we can use it to find the 
flashlight.?  Vicious circle indeed. 
 
 
  The thing is, obstacles have always been, and alway
s will be, part of life. There is no 
obstacle free life. There is no human story without
 obstacles, whether it™s fiction, like 
Romeo and Juliette, or Vasilasa, or real, like Toya
 Suyemoto Kawakami. 
 
The 
inconvenient 
obstacles we simply have to bear and grit teeth. Li
nes at the BMV. 
Traffic snarls. Earthquakes. All that. There is not
hing we can do about it. I™m sorry. Even 
if a sad death comes of it. 
Shikata ga nai. 
Nothing can be done.
  
But it seems to me that our calling as religious li
berals is to faithfully refuse to say 
shikata ga nai
 when it comes to 
consequential
 obstacles with permanent effects. Thus, 
my hope and faith as a religious person is this: I 
have faith that there doesn™t 
have to be
 any systemic obstacle to health care for everyone, 
no matter what. I have faith that any 
such obstacles already in place can be patiently ov
ercome. I have faith that there doesn™t 
have to be any systemic obstacles placed before the
 guy on the street in a sleeping bag in 
the cold at two AM who needs warm shelter. If there
 are obstacles in place, and there are, 
I have faith they can be patiently overcome. I have
 faith there doesn™t need to be any 
systemic obstacles to ending wars, repairing the en
vironment or making peace. Where 
there are obstacles, I have faith they can be faced
 and overcome. And I have great faith 
that we can even overcome the obstacle of our own s
elves, our own overwhelm, and get 
on to patient, incremental work. I live by this fai
th. I cannot live without it. I have this 
faith for many reasons, but not the least of them i
s knowing that women like Toyo 
suffered both kinds of obstacles, and yet lived on 
to make a good and even joyous life for 
herself, transforming her grief into strength. And 
so I just have to love how Leonard ends 
his reading, and with that I™ll end my sermon: 

 
?Must we go on building, expanding, exploiting fore
ver?  Obviously not.  The earth is a 
limited system. So we now–right now–. are living in
 a world that demands not 
Civilization, but Transformation.?   So be it. 

 
Offering 

 
Wing it! You are the best! 

 
Norito
  
(Shinto priests I used to work with insist that the
 Japanese word kami, used in 
these prayers, is not to be translated as deity, as
 is often done in western interpretations 
of Shinto, but rather as Great Nature. And so I do 
now.) 
 
(clap three times. bow) 

It is the end of the celebration, 

and we are here, O Great Nature. 

The wooden ceiling is above us. 

The carpeted floor is below us. 

And we are surrounded by our community, 

both strangers and friends. 

We are soon to sing the closing song, 

a rousing spiritual from another tradition 

 
  found in this world of interwoven traditions. 

You, O Great Nature, surround us too, 

as much inside this building as outside it  

in the black tree branches. You are the guarantee t
hat all of our burdens will one day fall 
away from us, for you are constant evolution, and t
herefore we too are constant 
evolution. We are coming to the end of this prayer,
 O Great Nature. Soon this voice will 
trail off. But, we have been here and that is good.
 And now we will sing, and that too is 
good. (clap) 

  

 
