  July 28, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper   THE FRUIT OF HOPE: ENDURANCE  1 Thessalonians 1:2-3 We give thanks to God always for you all, constantly mentioning you in ourprayers, remembering before our God and Father your work of faith and laborof love and endurance of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.  In 1 Thessalonians 1:3 Paul gives thanks to God that faith has produced workand love has produced labor and hope has produced endurance. If you tookthose words all by themselves you might treat faith, hope and love as verygeneral psychological forces that have inevitable effects on our productivityand durability. You might say, for example, that faith in yourself produceshard work, and love for family produces labor to earn food, and hope forvictory produces endurance to finish the race. And, of course, that wouldbe true. But it wouldn't be Christian. It wouldn't be of any spiritual oreternal value. It wouldn't be what Paul is talking about here. When Paul speaks of faith giving rise to work and love giving rise to laborand hope giving rise to endurance, he has in mind some very definite Christian,spiritual transactions between us and God -- God the Father, God the Son,and God the Holy Spirit. Notice how Paul links the Christian life of faith and love and hope to everymember of the Christian Trinity: First, notice the relationship to God the Son: at the end of verse 3 thefaith and love and hope are "in our Lord Jesus Christ." Paul is not describinggeneral psychological principles, he is describing particular spiritual effectsof being in relation to a particular living Person, Jesus Christ. Faith andlove and hope which are "in our Lord Jesus Christ" give rise to a particularkind of work and labor and endurance that count for eternity because theycome from Christ and honor Christ. Second, notice the relationship of these things to God the Father. At thebeginning of verse 3 it is to God the Father that Paul gives thanks for thefaith and love and hope that the Thessalonians have: "Remembering beforeour God and Father..." So evidently God the Father has been instrumentalin producing this faith and love and hope, since He gets thanked for it. But in verse 4 the connection with God the Father is even more specific.Verse 4 teaches that if faith in Christ produces work, and love in Christproduces labor, and hope in Christ produces endurance, this is clear evidencethat the Thessalonians have been chosen by God. Verse 4 connects with verse3 like this: "We give thanks for your faith and love and hope for (by this)we know, brethren beloved by God, that he has chosen you." We know that youare among the elect of God because of the fruitfulness of your faith andlove and hope. Third, notice the relationship to God the Holy Spirit. Verses 5 and 6 makethe connection clear. "For our gospel came to you not only in word, but alsoin power and in the Holy Spirit and with full conviction." So the changein these people's lives is not only evidence that they are chosen by Godthe Father, as verse 4 says; it is also evidence that the Holy Spirit waspowerfully at work within them. Verse 6 spells out the evidence of this just like verse 3 did: "You becameimitators of us and of the Lord, for you received the word in much afflictionwith joy inspired by the Holy Spirit." The fact that affliction didn't destroythe joy of their faith is evidence that the gospel had come with Holy Spiritpower and not just in word. So the upshot of all this is that the faith and love and hope of verse 3are not general psychological principles that happen to work and make peoplemore productive and stable. Rather they are profound theological realities.They come from a relationship with the living Lord, Jesus Christ. They arethe result and evidence of being chosen by God the Father. And they are thework of the Holy Spirit through the preaching of a particular message calledthe gospel. What we want to focus on this morning is the relationship between enduranceand hope. Our text is verse 3 and in particular the phrase, "endurance ofhope." I take this to mean that hope produces endurance, or that enduranceis the fruit of hope. My reason for this interpretation is that "work offaith" and "labor of love" seem to have that meaning -- namely, a work whichcomes from faith and a labor which comes from love. Faith produces work.And love produces labor. Similarly then, endurance comes from hope and hopeproduces endurance. The question I want to ask this morning is this: How do you keep on goingin a path of obedience to Christ -- say, in some relationship or some ministry-- how do you keep going month after month for years or even decades whenthere are emotional and relational and spiritual and financial obstacles,and when the normal human encouragements evaporate and you feel forgotten? What does it take to hang in there when the glamour is gone? The limelightis terribly fickle. It moves from ministry to ministry in the local church.For a while it is on the music ministry. Then there is a special focus onChristian Education. Then comes missions week, and being a world Christianand going across cultures is a glorious thing. Then the international studentministry stands out, then urban ministries, then small groups, then the ministryof prayer and the thrill of being a praying church with teams praying throughevery service and every morning of the week. As the limelight moves and focuses on a ministry, it looks bright and exciting,and so the ministry picks up people. There is a sense of thrill and joy andcamaraderie and power. But then the limelight moves on. Gradually no oneseems to be talking about your ministry any more. It doesn't turn up in theSTAR as often. Recruits aren't called for from the pulpit. Other things seemto be getting people exciting now. Does God mean then for ministries to flourish only when they are in the limelightof attention and glory? Does he want dynamic ministries of music and educationand missions and international students and urban concerns and 20:20 groupsand prayer only when they have the limelight of church wide attention? Theanswer is clearly, NO. What then is needed? The answer is: Endurance. Absolutely indispensable in the ongoing life of the church of God is thepower to keep going month after month year after year, even decade afterdecade in the path of obedience. And for many of us that will mean long-haulendurance in a particular ministry in spite of emotional and relational andspiritual and financial obstacles, even when the encouragements of the limelightand the attention and the glory and the admiration are gone, and we feellike the joys of life are passing us by. There will be a world of difference between the joy and enthusiasm and admirationwhen we commission the Roys and Richters and Reyes tonight, and the stressand loneliness and sickness six months from now in Cameroon and Guatemala.What does God require of such missionaries? What does he require of you inyour ministry, in your marriage, in the burden of your sickness or disability?He requires endurance. And where does endurance come from? It comes fromhope. "I give thanks to God ... for your work of faith and labor and enduranceof hope." Without the endurance of hope, the work of faith and the labor of love willprove to be no real work of God but only the love of the limelight. We donot live in a generation that puts a high premium on endurance in relationshipsor jobs or in ministry. And we are very much children of our age. If we followScripture here we will be swimming against the tide. So be it! This is acall for the endurance of the saints! (Revelation 13:10; 14:12) Let us probe the connection between hope and endurance by asking a very crucialand practical question: are Christians supposed to endure in the path ofobedience in order to inherit the blessings of heaven; or are Christianssupposed to endure because the blessings of heaven are certainly and infalliblytheirs? Let's ask it another way: is endurance in the path of obedience to Christa condition we must meet in order to obtain the inheritance of salvation;or is the inheritance of salvation already a guaranteed gift so that ourconfidence in it is what enables us to endure? Or to ask it one other way: Is the message of the gospel. You must endureto the end in order to be saved; or is the message of the gospel, You shallendure to the end because you are saved? The Biblical answer to all six of these questions is a resounding YES! Youmust endure to the end in order to be saved. And you shall endure preciselybecause you are saved. Salvation is both the reward of endurance, and thefree gift of grace. We endure in order to inherit the blessings of heavenand because we are sure that the blessings of heaven are certainly ours. Now the reason I stress this is that the place you must go to strengthenyour hope is to the Scriptures, and what you will find when you do is bothof these teachings (the "must" and the "shall"; the "in order to" and the"because"). And I don't want you to mangle the Scriptures, or miss the preciousencouragement of God in both kinds of texts. Let me illustrate these twokinds of Scripture and try to show how both are really intended to strengthenand sustain your hope and empower your endurance. First, let's look at theSHALLS and then at the MUSTS. You recall from last week how the new covenant promises were better thanthe old covenant because they are accompanied with the assurance of spiritualpower to fulfill the covenant conditions. For example, in Jeremiah 32:40God promises, I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn awayfrom doing good to them; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, thatthey may not turn from me. This is the same as Ezekiel's saying in 36:27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes andbe careful to observe my commandments. So what do we learn from these verses? We learn that the people of God SHALLendure in the path of obedience. "I SHALL put the fear of me in their hearts,that they may not turn from me!" "I SHALL put my Spirit within you, and causeyou to walk in my statutes." Endurance is a promised gift of the new covenant.It is one of the great SHALLS of God's sovereign grace! And so we come over to the New Testament and read in Philippians 1:6 "I amsure that he who began a good work in you SHALL bring it to completion atthe day of Jesus Christ." God WILL do it. And 2 Timothy 1:12, "I know whomI have believed, and I am sure that he is able to guard until that Day whathas been entrusted to me." In other words God SHALL keep Paul faithful inthe ministry he has been given. To the Corinthians (l Cor. 1:8-9) Paul says, "Christ SHALL confirm you tothe end, blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful,by whom you were called into the fellowship of his Son." In other words,if God calls you into the fellowship of his Son, he will give you enduranceto the end. "He who calls you is faithful, and he WILL do it!" (1 Thessalonians5:24). "Those whom he called he also justified, and those whom he justifiedhe also glorified" (Romans 8:30). The path from justification to glorification is a path of obedience. Thispath is the guarantee and the gift of God bought for God's people by theblood of the new covenant: "Now may the God of peace who brought again fromthe dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood ofthe eternal covenant, equip you with everything good that you may do thiswill, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ;to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen" (Hebrews l3:20-2l). The blood-boughtblessing of the new covenant is the commitment of almighty God never to turnaway from doing us good and to work in us what is pleasing in his sight,and thus to cause us to ENDURE in obedience to the end. Endurance is a giftand guarantee of the new covenant sealed by the blood of Jesus for all whotrust in him. And so we take heart when we feel weak, and we look away from ourselves toGod's grace and power and rekindle our hope that we can and will endure inthe path of obedience to which he has called us. Now that is one kind of text which you find in the Bible when you come lookingfor encouragement and strength. But their is another kind also. The firstkind says that endurance has been bought by the death of Christ for his peopleand is guaranteed. The second kind says that endurance is a must for God'speople and by it they will obtain the reward of salvation. The first says,You shall endure because you are saved. The second says, You must endurein order to be saved. Let's look at this second kind of text. As he describes the end times Jesus says, "Because wickedness is multiplied,most men's love will grow cold. But he who endures to the end will be saved"(Matthew 24:13; 10:22; 2 Timothy 2:12). You must endure to the end in orderto be saved. Paul says to the church at Rome, "God will render to every manaccording to his works: to those who by endurance in well-doing seek forglory and honor and immortality, he will give eternal life" (Romans 2:6-7).We will obtain eternal life IF by our endurance we press on in well-doing. He says virtually the same thing in the great epistle of freedom, Galatians6:8-9, "For he who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption;but he who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life. Andlet us not grow weary in well-doing (i.e. let us endure!), for in due seasonwe shall reap if we do not lose heart." The reaping of eternal life is attainedonly by those who sow to the Spirit and do not grow weary in well-doing --those who endure. We must endure in order to inherit (reap) eternal life. And Hebrews 10:35-36 teach the same thing: "Do not throw away your confidence,which has great reward. For you have need of endurance, so that you may dothe will of God and receive what is promised." You need to endure so thatyou can do the will of God so that you can obtain what is promised. Theinheritance is only given to those who endure in obedience to the will ofGod (Heb. 3:6,l2f; 6:ll;l0:23;l2:lff). Those are the two kinds of texts you find in the Bible concerning endurance.The one kind assures us that we SHALL endure because we are saved. The otherkind urges us to endure so that we will be saved. Endurance is a gift andendurance is a duty. And these are not in conflict. When dealing with a holyand sovereign God these are not contradictions. We MUST endure to the endfor he is holy; and we SHALL endure to the end, for he is sovereign. In one sense the two different kinds of Scriptures because they have twodifferent purposes. But in another sense they are perfectly one. Considertheir different purposes.  The SHALLS of scripture do three things. 1) They turn us away from all self-reliance and boasting (1 Corinthians 4:7)and direct us to the sovereign power of God. "He will cause us to endure!" 2) The SHALLS of Scripture turn us away from all legalism -- the thoughtthat we could ever earn the heavenly reward. It was bought by Christ. Itis a free gift and cannot be earned. Endurance is not a way of paying forsalvation. It is a way of experiencing grace (1 Peter 4:10-11; Galatians15:10) and living by faith (Galatians 2:20). 3) The shalls of Scripture give confidence and peace to the broken and contritewho cast themselves on Jesus for forgiveness and help.  The MUSTS of Scripture do three things. 1) They remind us that the miracle of conversion is not a legal fiction.You can't be converted to Christ and have everything stay the way it was.There MUST be a change -- a change that endures. There must be the "workof faith, the labor of love and the endurance of hope." "Those who belongto Christ have crucified the flesh" (Galatians 5:24). 2) The MUSTS of Scripture direct our attention to the exceedingly great valueof the reward of heaven. If we must endure, and if endurance comes from hope,then I must get my heart free from the love of the world and set it on thevalue of the things above so that my hope in God will be kindled and I willhave the power to endure in obedience to Christ. 3) The MUSTS of Scripture provide us with with a way of testing whether wehave any right to claim the SHALLS for ourselves. To whom do the SHALLS ofScripture belong? They belong to those who are broken by the musts of Scriptureand who fly to Christ for forgiveness and help.  So the SHALLS of Scripture give the Christian life its peace and securityand stability, and the MUSTS of Scripture give the Christian life its urgencyand earnestness and mission. The SHALLS base the Christian life on the sovereigngrace and power of God. The MUSTS remind us of the necessity to depend onthis grace and power. So in the end both the SHALLS and the MUSTS of Scripture point us to thesame thing: they point us away from ourselves to the sovereign grace andpower of God. The SHALLS do it directly with promises of grace. The MUSTSdo it indirectly by commanding us to do things we can't do without grace. And so when you read in Scripture that God SHALL cause you to endure (Jeremiah32:40), the aim is that, with all peace and joy, you would set your hopeon the sovereign grace of God, and in that hope find the strength to endure.And when you read in Scripture that you MUST endure (Luke 21:19), the aimis the same: that, with all urgency and earnestness, you would set your hopeon the sovereign grace of God and in that hope find the strength to endure. The SHALLS of Scripture are sweet and reassuring calls to hope in God. TheMUSTS of Scripture are urgent and earnest calls to hope in God. The MUSTS are not telling us to endure in our own strength. And the SHALLSare not telling us that we don't have to endure. Both the SHALLS and theMUSTS are telling us: HOPE IN GOD! HOPE IN GOD! HOPE IN GOD! For this isthe great source of power to endure in the path of obedience. If you put your hope in the sovereign grace and power of God and not in yourown strength, or in the approval of others or in money or in fleeting pleasuresor in status, then when the limelight shifts off your ministry and your life,and the praise of man is gone, and the glamour of self-denial evaporatesand all the supports of men crumble, then you SHALL endure -- with the enduranceof hope. Therefore my beloved brethren, be steadfast, immovable, always aboundingin the work of the Lord, knowing that in the Lord your labor is not in vain. After 17 weeks of messages on hope I feel constrained to entreat you whohave not put your hope in Christ to do it now. Humble yourselves under themighty hand of God, acknowledge your sin, let go of worldly hopes, and trustin Christ for the forgiveness of sins, the power to endure, and the hopeof everlasting life. Amen!   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
