The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern 
India and their Hagiology* 


BY C.V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 

These are called the Dravidian Saints. Their wonderful lives clearly show the significance of God 's love to man, and man 's love to God; the former being the fulfilment of His object of creation, and the latter being man's aspiration to 'know' Him. As St. Francis de Sales observes: "The end of specul≠ative theology is to teach us to know God; and the object of mystical theology is to teach us to love Him. One produces learned men, doctors, theologians; while the other forms Saints or ardent lovers of the Almighty, devoted to His service and burning with zeal for His interests." 

    It has been said that the power of salvation, which these great Saints possess, exceeds even that of God. For do not we, who are the disciples of Baba, realize this important truth? This spiritual fact is very well illustrated by the story of Uparichara-Vasu. 

This is given in Mahabharata Shanti 

Parva, Moksha Dharma. 

Uparichara-Vasu was a great king; but by a Rishi 's curse he had to live with the demons of the nether regions. There he worshipped the One Great God with intense devotion. The demons harassed him, but to no effect, as he was His devotee. Then they requested their teacher, Sukra, to suggest some way by which they might conquer him. The teacher told them that they could easily conquer him if they could turn him from his God. The more the demons tried to do so, the more stead≠fast he became, and his heart was full of pity for those unfortunate sinners. He prayed to God that He might shower His mercy even on those people and this prayer of that great Saint had its immediate effect. The vile demons became loving devotees of God and were blessed. 

 A great book says: "Not all the copious waters of the sacred rivers, not all the idols made of mud and stone, but Saints alone purify by mere sight." If we live our lives we are sure of salvation through them, for Saints are Gods on earth, they intercede for us with Him. The great Nanjiyar often used to say that when-ever he saw a Saint, a devotee of the Lord, he fell at his feet with his head touching them, exclaiming that he felt as if he had eaten his fill, and his hunger had vanished. What is the secret of this? Our dear Baba, in his own inimitable way, said: "The root of all our difficulties, individual a n d social, is self-interest." Self-ness is spiritual death. It is this selfness ahankara and selfishness mamakara which are the cause of one's spiritual retardation. 

To Saints all things in this beautiful universe remind one of God. They have conquered self-love. In this connection the beautiful observations of St. Francis de Sales on 'Love of God' are very instructive: "If we compare several theologians who speak eloquently of the Almighty, but  who love Him little, with those who love him ardently as the Ignatiuses, the Cyprians, the Chryso≠stoms, the Augustines, the Hilaries, the Ephrems, the Gregories, the Bernards and several other illustrious men of antiquity, oh, what a difference shall we discover in their language. We all use the same expressions, but the words pronounced by those lovers of the Almighty were inflamed and em≠balmed, if we may say so, with the delicious perfume of divine love; whereas with us they are only cold expressions which contain neither the energy nor the sweetness of charity. " Thomas a Kempis said: "The love of self is more hurtful to the soul than the united power of the world." We find complete sacrifice of self-love in our great Dravidian Saints of Southern India. Their chief charac≠teristic is love. The great Nanjiyar once said: "The test of a real Vaishnava is this: if on seeing a person in adverse circumstances his pity is excited, he is then a true Vaishnava; but if his heart is then one of steel he is not a Vaishnava. To be a Vaishnava is to belong to the One great God, and to belong 

to the great God is to be a Vaishnava. To belong to God is to conform to the ideals He has laid down, one of those ideals being to be the friend of all creatures." 

And surely those great Saints were the friends of all creatures, just as our great living Saint, Meher Baba, is. Has He not taught us the spiritual dignity of humble service by his own example of cleaning the latrines of the God-mad men and the destitute, to feed and tend to the sick and give our less fortunate brothers a spiritual bath? Such were the real Saints of old. 

There were a dozen Vaishnava Azhvar (Saints) whose lives show that they were real Vaishnavas and they are really worthy of worship. They were: 1 St. Tondar-adippodi Azhvar 2 St. Peri Azhvar. 3 St. Andal 4 St. Poygai Azhvar 5 St. Pudat Azhvar 6 St. Pey Azhvar 7 St. Tiru-mazhisai Azhvar 8 St. Kula Sekhar Azhvar 9 St. Tiruppan Azhvar 10 St. Tirumangai Azhvar 11 St. Madhura Kavigal 12 St. Namm Azhvar 



(To be continued) 