Sunday, February 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet (i.e., feed grain in the Old World), and fitches (i.e., spelt, hard grain kind of wheat seed), and put them in one vessel, and MAKE THEE BREAD THEREOF, according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety (390) days shalt thou eat thereof... And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt BAKE IT WITH DUNG THAT COMETH OUT OF MAN, IN THEIR SIGHT (!)(!)(!) And the Lord said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them. Then said I, Ah Lord God! behold, my soul hath not been polluted; for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there ABOMINABLE flesh into my mouth. Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith. Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem; and they shall eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by astonishment; That they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity." Ezek. 4:9-17.  All as warned of and threatened by Moses in one of the Pentateuch's great, somber chapters of divine curses, Lev. 26; to wit: "And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth. And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth; and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies. And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up. And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them." Lev. 26:36-39.  Here is another word picture, painted by the Holy Ghost, of the totally corrupt Jewish people, ripe for judgment and the outpoured wrath of God. It is not unlike words and phrases found throughout the prophetic passages of God's blessed Word. One exception is the Lord's commandment to Ezekiel that the prophet eat human dung, apparently every day for 430 days, in the sight of the children of Israel, to illustrate Ezekiel's sermons ­ particularly to symbolize or illustrate how deeply Israel's soul-damning corruption was in the eyes of a holy God; to wit: "And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it WITH DUNG that cometh out of man, IN THEIR SIGHT. And the Lord said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them." (Ezek. 4:12,13)  Do you suppose, Beloved, that the mob of filthy Jews who contended with Ezekiel every day for 430 days criticized him for using freak-show stunts like eating human feces in public just for cheap publicity? Do you suppose important people in the mob held meetings in secret to plot and plan ways and means to have Ezekiel arrested and prosecuted for disturbing the peace by agitating against good moral conduct, or for some other false, cooked up charge? It certainly seems from reading the record that Ezekiel was under considerable stress, holding a street-preaching service daily, at a busy street-corner at a busy downtown intersection, enduring many taunts, insults, rocks, and blows.  Moreover, a daily diet of human feces mixed in the bread has got to be taxing on the nerves as the days go by. Ezekiel, after a while, made his case for a change of diet, in a very impassioned way; to wit:  Sunday, February 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Then said I, Ah Lord God! behold, my soul hath not been polluted; for from my  youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in  pieces; neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth." (Ezek. 4:14)  Gill: "The interjection `ah' is expressive of sighing and groaning, as Jarchi says; or of deprecation, as the Targum, which paraphrases it, `and I said, receive my prayer, O Lord God; behold, my soul has never been polluted...' The argument is, that since he had never eaten of any thing forbidden by the law of God, he could by no means think of eating that which was abhorrent to nature; AS BREAD BAKED WITH HUMAN DUNG WAS." Evidently Ezekiel was persuasive in his pleading with the Lord, because the Lord allowed him to henceforth eat his bread mixed with COW'S DUNG rather than MAN'S DUNG; to wit: "Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee COW'S DUNG for MAN'S DUNG, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith." Ezek. 4:15.  Then the Lord added a measure of declared punishment to befall the Jews because of their persistent, filthy, sodomitical wickedness, that would, for sheer divine pain and holy fierceness, be unprecedentedly and uniquely ASTONISHING (the word selected by the Holy Ghost). As though the Lord God Almighty said in effect, If you think eating man's dung and/or cow's dung mixed in your daily bread for 430 days was bad, just wait till you see what's coming, when you will have no bread at all to eat, and the besieged Jews in Jerusalem pine away ­ from sucklings to gray hairs ­ to a painful and slow death by starvation; to wit: "Moreover he (the Lord God Almighty) said unto me, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem; and THEY SHALL EAT BREAD BY WEIGHT, AND WITH CARE;" ­ (i.e., bread will be so scarce due to the lengthy siege against Jerusalem, that the Jews will be obliged to very, very carefully weigh out tiny little portions, that will serve to more painfully draw out the inevitable death by starvation) ­ "and they shall drink water by measure, AND WITH ASTONISHMENT; That they may want bread and water, AND BE ASTONIED ONE WITH ANOTHER, AND CONSUME AWAY FOR THEIR INIQUITY." Ezek. 4:16,17.  What a fearsome picture is here painted by the Holy Ghost: Millions of foul-mouthed, educated, smart-ass Jews, wandering around, day after day, cooped up in Jerusalem, looking upon each other IN ASTONISHMENT, as each is slowly, painfully, wasting away to a unique, unprecedented death by mass starvation ­ "FOR THEIR INIQUITY." Beloved. Look at this picture. Would those starving Jews not have gladly eaten COW'S DUNG ­ even MAN'S DUNG ­ and would they not have gladly bought and paid ANY PRICE, WHATEVER THEY HAD ­ for a tiny morsel of such DUNG?  On another occasion, the Syrian king Benhadad besieged Samaria, capital city of the northern 10 tribes, in further illustration of this point; to wit: "And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria gathered all his host, and went up and besieged Samaria. And there was A GREAT FAMINE in Samaria; and, behold, they besieged it, until AN ASS'S HEAD was sold for fourscore pieces of silver (80 pieces, a small fortune), and the FOURTH PART OF A CAB OF DOVE'S DUNG (a tiny morsel) for five pieces of silver (a large sum). 2 Kgs. 6:24,25.  In further illustration of the straits to which the promised curses of God will take the disobedient and the rebellious Jews and Gentiles, consider the immediately-following colloquy between two mothers in Israel upon the same occasion; to wit: "And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king. And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress? And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my son to morrow. So we boiled my son, and did eat him; and I said unto her on the next day, Give thy  Sunday, February 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  son, that we may eat him; and she hath hid her son. And it came to pass, when  the king heard the words of the woman, that he rent his clothes; and he passed by  upon the wall, and the people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon  his flesh." (2 Kgs. 6:26-30)  [(Note: As a slight aside it should be added to this historical narrative that the king of Israel who rent his clothes in commendable distress and grief upon hearing the dispute between the two women over cannibalizing their respective sons ­ I say, it should be pointed out that this king of Israel was JEHORAM, the evil son of wicked Ahab and Jezebel; to wit: "Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria, the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years. And he wrought evil in the sight of the Lord; but not like his father, and like his mother; for he put away the image of Baal that his father had made. Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom." (2 Kgs. 3:1-3)  Therefore, I say that rending his clothes and wearing sackcloth and ashes ­ which ordinarily stands for repentance, confession of and sorrow for sin, and mourning for national calamities, etc. ­ are in the case of JEHORAM son of Ahab and Jezebel, nothing but rank hypocrisy. And, threatening to decapitate the prophet Elisha ­ blaming him for the straits of starvation brought on by the Syrian siege of Samaria under the curse of God for Israel's idolatry and departure from the living God ­ is further proof of Jehoram's rank hypocrisy; to wit: "Then he (Jehoram) said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day." 2 Kgs. 6:31.)]  When the curses of God according to His oft-threatened word fall out in tragic so-called "Earth Judgments" ­ (i.e., tornadoes, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, famines, fires, pestilences, wars, massacres, so-called fatal/deadly "accidents," disasters, catastrophes, calamities, etc. ­ all such judgments as take place on earth and prior to the Great Judgment Day, as referred to in such passages as 1st Timothy; to wit: "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they follow after." 1 Tim. 5:24.) ­ I say, when the oft-threatened curses of God fall upon men in devastating Earth Judgments straight from God, the deaf, dumb and blind earth-dwellers with one accord blame the prophets of God for warning them before the fact, and for identifying God as their Terrorist ­ their Enemy ­ after the fact.  The 9/11 tragedy is a perfect example. For ten years prior to the 9/11 tragedy, on a daily basis, on the mean streets, and through the equally-mean mass media, WBC warned America that they were going the way of ancient Sodom, and that America would likewise suffer the wrath of an angry God. America responded by viciously persecuting WBC. After 9/11, WBC identified the Lord God Almighty as the Sovereign Perpetrator of 9/11, but America only responded by persecuting WBC even more viciously. Talk about pouring gasoline on the raging fires of God's wrath. We are warning this evil nation again, that the curse of God is upon America. Thousands of troops have come home in body bags already, and much, much more pain is scheduled for this stubborn, filthy, and rebellious American Sodom.  Antichrist and his demon-possessed Cabinet now run this American Sodom with a criminal population of 300 million fags and fag-enablers. They make wicked King Ahab and his murderous son King Jehoram look like small fry. Nevertheless, many arguments could be made from the Scriptures that Ahab was the most evil man that ever lived; e.g.: "And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel; and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria  Sunday, February 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  twenty and two years. AND AHAB THE SON OF OMRI DID EVIL IN THE SIGHT OF  THE LORD ABOVE ALL THAT WERE BEFORE HIM. And it came to pass, as if it had  been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that  HE TOOK TO WIFE JEZEBEL THE DAUGHTER OF ETHBAAL KING OF THE  ZIDONIANS, AND WENT AND SERVED BAAL, AND WORSHIPPED HIM. AND HE  REARED UP AN ALTAR FOR BAAL IN THE HOUSE OF BAAL, WHICH HE HAD  BUILT IN SAMARIA. AND AHAB MADE A GROVE; AND AHAB DID MORE TO  PROVOKE THE LORD GOD OF ISRAEL TO ANGER THAN ALL THE KINGS OF  ISRAEL THAT WERE BEFORE HIM." (1 Kgs. 16:29-33)  The prophet Elijah dealt with wicked King Ahab in the Name of God; and the prophet Elisha dealt with his similarly evil son King Jehoram, under strikingly similar circumstances. James brings the contest between Ahab and Elijah right into the 21st Century Wars of the Lord for the instructions and encouragement of WBC; to wit: "The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. Elijah was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit." (Jas. 5:16-18) It is important to notice here that the prayers of Elijah brought Ahab's Satanic empire to its knees by merciless starvation (1 Kgs. chapters 17 & 18); and that much the same thing was wrought by Elisha in the Satanic empire of Jehoram, Ahab's wicked son (2 Kgs. chapters 6 & 7). What do we learn here, Beloved? It is specifically said that Elijah prayed for a grievous famine throughout the land; to wit: "And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab, As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word." 1 Kgs. 17:1. "And there was a sore famine in Samaria." 1 Kgs. 18:2. "And she said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die." 1 Kgs. 17:12.  It is reasonable to assume that this famine at Elijah's behest was at least as severe as the famine of Elisha's day, wherein mothers ate their children; to wit: "And there was a great famine in Samaria." 2 Kgs. 6:24-29. The operative statute, regarding the curse of the famine unto starvation, supporting the prayers of the prophets for divine retribution for the evil nation's sins, was 1,000 years old; to wit: "And when I have broken the staff of your bread (i.e., sent a total famine), ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by weight; and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied. And if ye shall not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat." (Lev. 26:26-29) Beloved, what else can we learn from these events? Beside the duty to pray down God's wrath on rebellious nations? Just as Ahab and Jehoram blamed the prophets for the famines; so, too, can we expect tyrants to blame us; to wit: "And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? And he answered, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken (the Lord your God)." (1 Kgs. 18:17,18)  I love you. Amen.  
