Sunday, March 23, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "Woe unto them! They have gone in the way of Cain."  The "Way of Cain" is to be a stupid TURNIP-HEAD and to insult God with a bloodless offering of turnips. The "Way of Cain" is to kill Abel (i.e., God's Elect), because of Abel's (i.e., God's Elect's) ­ 5Point Calvinistic preaching. "Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother (Abel). And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous. Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you." (1 Jn. 3:12,13) "By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain...and by it he being dead yet speaketh." (Heb. 11:4) MACTATION. Bloodshedding. Jude 10,11. "But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the WAY OF CAIN." Jude 10,11. We briefly touched on this subject of Cain and Abel last Sunday, as a part of my sermon on the blood of God's Elect, and how precious that blood is in the sight of God. Our text was Psa. 72:13,14; to wit: "He shall spare the poor and needy (i.e., God's Elect), and shall save the souls of the needy (i.e., God's Elect). He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence (i.e., attacks of Satan upon the minds and bodies of God's Elect); and PRECIOUS shall their BLOOD be in His sight." (Psa. 72:13,14) "Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain" ­ this verse signifies the certainty of going to Hell of all those who have gone in the way of Cain ­ pointing to the definite and distinct "way" or pathway of life known as "the way of Cain." Jude 11. The Way of Cain is nothing other than the pathway that all the non-Elect are traveling. It was first traveled by Cain ­ who was the first man ever BORN into the world. Adam and Eve, his parents, were not born; but rather, they were CREATED. Cain was revealed by his conduct to be the seed of the Serpent, as distinct from the seed of the Woman, which Abel was revealed by his conduct to be ­ all as taught to and by our first parents in Genesis, chapter 3. In fact, and by the way, every major doctrine in the Word of God had its beginning in the book of beginnings, which is, by definition, the book of Genesis. But back to Gen. 3; to wit: "And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life: And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel...Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins, and clothed  Sunday, March 23, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  them," ­ (formerly thereto, Adam and Eve `knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig  leaves together, and made themselves aprons')." Gen. 3:7,14,15, 21. Showing symbolically at  the very dawning of human history, that blood must be shed if mankind's spiritual nakedness is  to be covered ­ and pointing ahead to the coming of Christ into the world, and the shedding of  His precious blood upon the cross for the redemption of His Elect. Mactation.  "And without shedding of blood is no remission." (Heb. 9:22)  "For the life of the flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul." (Lev. 17:11)  MACTATION. These precious doctrines were undoubtedly taught by Adam and Eve unto their first two children ­ Cain and Abel. From the time they were born, and well into early manhood. Yes. Without a doubt. Those two boys were honor graduates from the Adam and Eve Theological Seminary. Gen. 4:1-4. I have taught that, as being included in a reasonable ­ if indeed not a necessary exposition of verse 3(a); to wit: "And in the process of time ­ (the margin says, `at the end of days,')." Gen. 4:3(a).  So far, I have found only John Owen somewhat agreeing with my interpretation; to wit: "And in the process of time" Cain and Abel made their respective offerings unto God; "that is, `after the expiration of some time' or days, namely, after Cain and Abel were settled in their distinct callings, Gen. 4:3. Until then they had been under the instruction of their parents; but being now fixed in their own peculiar stations and callings, they made their distinct, solemn profession of the worship of God; which is the sense of the place, THOUGH NOT OBSERVED BY ANY EXPOSITORS."  Beloved. Cain and Abel were home-schooled by Adam and Eve. Yes. Pre-kindergarten through graduate school ­ with a doctorate in theology. The time had come, in effect, when Cain and Abel graduated from the Adam and Eve Theological Seminary. And we can be sure that with their brilliant minds at the dawn of creation, they understood all about the Five Points making up the Doctrines of Grace, and the absolute necessity of blood to be shed (Mactation) ­ the blood of an innocent victim ­ for remission of sins. So that, for Cain to bring of the fruit of the ground ­ say, TURNIPS ­ as an offering unto the Lord ­ was nothing less than stubborn defiance, rebellion, and arrant blasphemy. Cain should have brought of the firstlings of the flock, as Abel did ­ AND CAIN KNEW IT! For we read, "And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering: But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell...And Cain talked with Abel his brother;" ­ (note that Cain the TURNIP-HEAD initiated the conversations, no doubt quarreling with the equivalent of Jn. 3:16, Rom. 9:13, predestination vs. human responsibility, and the necessity of blood being shed in offerings to God as typifying the blood of Christ, election, predestination, reprobation, God's vengeance upon the non-elect for persecuting the Elect, etc.) ­ "and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him." Gen. 4:4,5,8.  Sunday, March 23, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  Owen says, "Here we have the prototype of the truly believing church being persecuted by the  merely professing church in all ages. A secret sense and fear arises in the hearts of evil men,  whence Satan fills them with envy and malice, and stirs them up unto persecution." The blood  of God's Elect has a voice in it, which cries to God when shed ­ as symbolized by the blood of  Abel; to wit:  "And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not. (And the Lord said), What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground." (Gen. 4:9,10) 1st murder. The Lord Jesus expanded ­ or at least articulated ­ the concept of murder ­ probably as it appertained to the murder ­ or shedding the blood ­ of God's Elect; to wit: "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother ­ (i.e., with God's Elect, as in persecuting them) ­ without a cause ­ (i.e., without a legitimate cause, and only because of God's Elect's preaching) ­ shall be in danger of the judgment." Mat. 5:21,22.  In other words, Jesus equated persecuting God's Elect short of physical murder WITH physical murder and the spilling of blood. It was not the murder, per se, of Abel by Cain, that brought down the wrath and curse of God upon Cain ­ but rather it was the fact that Cain's anger with Abel because he was God's Elect led to Abel's murder and spilling of blood. This doctrine is further supported by the last words of verse 22 of Mat. 5; to wit: "But whosoever shall say, Thou FOOL, ­ (i.e., dull or stupid clown, absurd, foolish buffoon; which constitutes mocking and scoffing God's Elect for their preaching), ­ shall be in danger of Hell fire (the ultimate punishment)." Which equates mocking and scoffing God's Elect for their doctrines and preaching with murder and the spilling of blood. "And in her ­ (the Great Whore of false religious systems as they control governments and together persecute God's Elect) ­ And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all (God's Elect) that were slain upon the earth." Rev. 18:24.  This is the great and eternal reason that all God's judgments are righteous; to wit: that God avenged the blood (i.e., every smidgen bit, every tiniest drop; meaning every offense, every angry word, every round of blasphemy, every bit of mocking and scoffing, as well as every physical blow up to and including every physical death of God's Elect). Here's the passage of proof; to wit:  "For true and righteous are his judgments; for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath AVENGED THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS at her hand." (Rev. 19:2)  Westboro Baptist Church has faithfully preached to this generation that every tragedy is punishment from God in wrath and vengeance for their sins generally, and for their persecution of WBC in particular. God sent the planes that brought down the New York towers and killed 3,000 on 9/11. God sent the Iraqi War and the Afghan War, and it is God who is sending our troops home in body bags on a regular basis. God sent Hurricane Katrina and killed thousands  Sunday, March 23, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  and destroyed billions. It is God who sends the shooters into your schools to kill your children  and make you deny God and further enrage Him for your atheism and your blasphemy. Of  course it is God who sends all these tragedies. ALL BECAUSE YOU HAVE PERSECUTED  WBC. Anybody who says otherwise is an atheist and a mocker and scoffer.  "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming?" (2 Pet. 3:3,4)  Anybody who says otherwise is a Hell-bound sinner, without hope and without God in the world. Eph. 2:12. And then you persecute us for telling you the truth about these tragedies. Which enrages God all the more. You idiots are pouring gasoline on the flaming fires of God's wrath. If you had even a cursory knowledge of the Bible, you would be trembling right now, primarily because of the way you have persecuted WBC. So much worse and more is coming ­ in the way of God visiting this evil nation in His wrath for their sins and departing from Him ­ but mainly because of the way you have persecuted WBC. The blood of every member of WBC cries unto God for vengeance, even as the souls under the altar; to wit:  "And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" (Rev. 6:10)  "Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?" (Jer. 5:29) In 1666, London had a great fire that killed thousands and burned the whole city to the ground. The old Puritan Thomas Brooks wrote a lengthy Sermon about the matter, which he delivered to the House of Commons ­ he being the appointed chaplain of that body. The Sermon ran to 312 printed pages in length, and he titled it, "London's Lamentations on the Late Fiery Dispensation." The several themes of the Sermon were essentially the themes of Westboro Baptist Church; to wit: that God burned London down, because of their sins and departing from the Lord, primarily because of the way London had persecuted the Puritans and other faithful preachers, and that the smart-ass, stiff-necked Londoners ­ were too stupid to recognize that God had sent the fire because of their sins, which would only bring worse and more tragedies. The blood of the old persecuted Puritan preachers cried unto God, who burned down London in His wrath. Brooks took as a text for his historically classic Sermon, two verses out of Isaiah; to wit: "Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the LORD? he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart." (Isa. 42:24,25)  Sunday, March 23, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  The great Prince of Preachers ­ Charles Spurgeon ­ used to tell the young preacher-boys at his Preachers' College in London: "If you would learn to preach well, drink often from the Brooks" ­ meaning that they should read often from the written works of the old Puritan preacher, Thomas Brooks (1608-1680). I believe we have everything that Brooks wrote, and everything that Spurgeon wrote, in our humble library. Brooks wrote, preached, and believed about this matter, all that the Puritans and other faithful ministers through the centuries have written, preached, and believed; to wit: "God is the author of all the plagues and judgments that befall a nation." If you don't believe that, you are a blind atheist, a fool; because "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." Psa. 14:1. In further expounding his 312-page Sermon about the Great Fire of London, Brooks said that God had brought the horrendous tragedy upon London because of the sins of the English people; even as God had brought devastating and final destruction upon the Jews, "As you may see (said Brooks) by comparing 2 Kgs. 23:33-37, with the 24th and 25th chapters following." Indeed, Brooks puts his text for the 312-page Sermon at the top of every single page ­ lest anybody forget Isa. 42:24,25 with its powerful message; to wit: God Sent 9/11; and, God Sent Katrina; and, God Sent The Shooter; and, God Sends Every Tragedy That Befalls Sinful Mankind. Now, Brooks points to 2 Kgs., chapters 24 and 25 as further dispositive and irrefragable proof of his proposition that, "God is the author of all the plagues and judgments that befall a nation." And, in a general way, God sends all such tragedies in punishment for the persecution of His people on earth; because, "Precious shall their blood be in His sight." Psa. 72:14. "And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the persecuting of his sons, and of his daughters. Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people; for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries." (Deut. 32:19,43) Thus we see, that the Lord commands all tragedies that befall the sons of men because of their persecuting His people. Is there a great tragedy? God Himself commanded it ­ because the victims of the tragedy, ­ in one way or another, ­ persecuted His people; to wit: In explanation of the horrendous destruction of the Jews, we read these words: "Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this ­ (i.e., the Babylonian Captivity) ­ upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did (filled the land with sodomites and idolatries); AND ALSO for the INNOCENT BLOOD that he shed ­ (i.e., he persecuted God's Elect): ­ for he filled Jerusalem with INNOCENT BLOOD ­ (i.e., he persecuted God's Elect on a massive scale); ­ WHICH THE LORD WOULD NOT PARDON." 2 Kgs. 24:3,4. Beloved. "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." Psa. 116:15. He keeps us as the apple of his eye. Deut. 32:10. He carries us upon eagles' wings. Deut. 32:11. Beloved. Our Father will redeem our soul from the deceit and violence of all our enemies; and precious shall our blood be in his sight. Psa. 72:14. Amen.  "Precious shall their blood be in His sight." (Psa. 72:14)  
