Sunday, March 16, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "Precious shall their blood be in His sight." (Psa. 72:14)  "He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and PRECIOUS shall their BLOOD be in his sight." (Psa. 72:13,14)  When you read in Scripture such terms as poor and needy, fatherless and widows, weak and helpless, etc. ­ those terms are usually put for God's Elect, because God's Elect, in this world, are pictured as helpless, weak little sheep in the midst of ravenous, salivating wolves; to wit:  "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." (Lk. 12:32)  Wolves are always in a blood-thirsty, slobbering pack. And, to tighten things up a little more, the Savior likened His Elect to BABY SHEEP, LAMBS. Is anything more helpless than a baby lamb? To-wit: "Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves ­ (wolves, plural ­ always in a pack, circling and slashing and devouring a single lamb)." Lk. 10:3. Beloved. Don't expect sympathy, or pity, or kindness from these wild animals all around us. Furthermore, two times in Scripture, they are called "EVENING WOLVES," meaning that the pack has hunted all day, and caught nothing, and are desperate and aggressively murderous by the time night falls ­ hence, "EVENING WOLVES." To wit: "They are terrible and dreadful...Their horses also are swifter than leopards, and are more FIERCE than the EVENING WOLVES." Hab. 1:7,8. "Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges (get that) are EVENING WOLVES; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow." Zeph. 3:3. And then add "RAVENOUS" to the bloody description; to wit: "Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves RAVENING ­ (i.e., extremely hungry, voracious) ­ the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain." Ezek. 22:27. And our Savior picked up and thereby endorsed the phrase, when He said, "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are RAVENING wolves." Mat. 7:15. And Paul added "GRIEVOUS" to the hellish mix; to wit:  "For I know this, that after my departing shall GRIEVOUS WOLVES enter in among you, not sparing the flock." (Acts 20:29)  Get the picture, Beloved. The word picture the Holy Ghost has painted for us, of the predicament we're in; to wit: a single little baby lamb, alone in the wilderness, surrounded by a huge pack of fiercely hungry wolves ­ all of them grievous, ravenous, evening wolves, ready to pounce on their pitiful, helpless, trembling prey. Once that wolf pack pounces on that lamb, slashing and tearing and swallowing flesh ­ give them, oh, say, 2 seconds, and there's not a sign of that lamb having ever existed ­ every morsel of that lamb is devoured and in some salivating wolf's belly. After all, we're talking about God's Elect in this world, called by the Holy Spirit, "the flock of slaughter." Zech. 11:4. Here's the verse:  "Thus saith the Lord my God; Feed the flock of the slaughter; Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty." (Zech. 11:4,5)  Sunday, March 16, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  Beloved. Here is one of the great mysteries of the Gospel; one of the great paradoxes of our faith. Put it this way. That little helpless lamb just killed the whole pack of slobbering, salivating, voracious, rapacious wolves. God's little sheep are "more than conquerors through him that loved us." Rom. 8:37. Listen to the glorious passage, dictated by the Holy Ghost; to wit: "As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us." Rom. 8:36,37. And that glorious passage is quoted out of Psalm 44:22; to wit: "Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter." Psa. 44:22. Yet, the helpless sheep "are more than conquerors." And, just here is the glorious passage showing forth the blessed paradox; to wit:  "But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 Cor. 15:57)  And it is to and of His sheep ­ (i.e., His Elect) ­ that Jesus is speaking in our text, when He says, "Precious shall their blood be in His sight." Psa. 72:14. Every last, single drop of blood, of every last, single sheep, is precious to Him. "Take heed," says our Lord Jesus Christ, ­ ("that great Shepherd of the Sheep" Heb. 13:20) ­ "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones (My Sheep); for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven...Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish." Mat. 18:10,14. Woe to those who lift up their hands in any way to harm one of His sheep ­ in any way whatsoever. Hear and heed this warning, straight and directly from the lips of the All-powerful Son of God; to wit:  "Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!" (Mat. 18:7)  You had better play with forked lightning or with a nest of forked-tongue rattlesnakes than to offend any one of God's Elect. On the Day of Judgment, God will make inquisition for blood. That is, He will thoroughly search out and avenge every minutest offense committed against every last single one of His Elect.  "And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily." (Lk. 18:7,8)  "When he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: he forgetteth not the cry of the humble (i.e., His Elect)." (Psa. 9:12)  "For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall DISCLOSE HER BLOOD", ­ (i.e., reveal every last single offense committed against God's Elect) ­ "and shall no more cover her slain" ­ (i.e., shall no more be able to hide a single one of the innumerable offenses committed against God's Elect)." Isa. 26:21.  Sunday, March 16, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  "Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be  known among the heathen in our sight by the REVENGING OF THE  BLOOD of thy servants which is shed." (Psa. 79:10)  The blood of God's Elect has a voice in it, which cries to God when it is shed ­ as symbolized by the blood of Abel, "and by it he being dead yet speaketh." Heb. 11:4.  "And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper? And he said, What hast thou done? the VOICE OF THY BROTHER'S BLOOD CRIETH UNTO ME FROM THE GROUND. And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy BROTHER'S BLOOD from thy hand." (Gen. 4:9-11) The Lord Jesus expanded ­ or at least articulated ­ the concept of murder ­ probably as it appertained to the murder ­ or shedding the blood ­ of God's Elect; to wit: "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother" ­ (i.e., with God's Elect, as in persecuting them) ­ "without a cause" ­ (i.e., without a legitimate cause, and only because of God's Elect's preaching) ­ "shall be in danger of the judgment." Mat. 5:21,22.  In other words, Jesus equated persecuting God's Elect short of physical murder WITH physical murder and the spilling of blood. It was not the murder, per se, of Abel by Cain, that brought down the wrath and curse of God upon Cain ­ but rather it was the fact that Cain's anger with Abel because he was God's Elect led to Abel's murder and spilling of blood. This doctrine is further supported by the last words of verse 22 of Mat. 5; to wit: "But whosoever shall say, Thou FOOL," ­ (i.e., dull or stupid clown, absurd, foolish buffoon; which constitutes mocking and scoffing God's Elect for their preaching), ­ "shall be in danger of Hell fire" (the ultimate punishment)." Which equates mocking and scoffing God's Elect for their doctrines and preaching with murder and the spilling of blood. "And in her" ­ (the Great Whore of false religious systems as they control governments and together persecute God's Elect) ­ "And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all (God's Elect) that were slain upon the earth." Rev. 18:24. This is the great and eternal reason that all God's judgments are righteous; to wit: that God avenged the blood (i.e., every smidgen bit, every tiniest drop); meaning every offense, every angry word, every round of blasphemy, every bit of mocking and scoffing, as well as every physical blow up to and including every physical death of God's Elect. Here's the passage of proof; to wit:  "For true and righteous are his judgments; for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath AVENGED THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS at her hand." (Rev. 19:2)  Westboro Baptist Church has faithfully preached to this generation that every tragedy is punishment from God in wrath and vengeance for their sins generally, and for their persecution of WBC in particular. God sent the planes that brought down the New York towers and killed  Sunday, March 16, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  3,000 on 9/11. God sent the Iraqi War and the Afghan War, and it is God who is sending our  troops home in body bags on a regular basis. God sent Hurricane Katrina and killed thousands  and destroyed billions. It is God who sends the shooters into your schools to kill your children  and make you deny God and further enrage Him for your atheism and your blasphemy. Of  course it is God who sends all these tragedies. ALL BECAUSE YOU HAVE PERSECUTED  WBC. Anybody who says otherwise is an atheist and a mocker and scoffer.  "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming?" (2 Pet. 3:3,4) Anybody who says otherwise is a Hell-bound sinner, without hope and without God in the world. Eph. 2:12. And then you persecute us for telling you the truth about these tragedies. Which enrages God all the more. You idiots are pouring gasoline on the flaming fires of God's wrath. If you had even a cursory knowledge of the Bible, you would be trembling right now, primarily because of the way you have persecuted WBC. So much worse and more is coming ­ in the way of God visiting this evil nation in His wrath for their sins and departing from Him ­ but mainly because of the way you have persecuted WBC. The blood of every member of WBC cries unto God for vengeance, even as the souls under the altar; to wit: "And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the  earth?" (Rev. 6:10) "Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?" (Jer. 5:29) In 1666, London had a great fire that killed thousands and burned the whole city to the ground. The old Puritan Thomas Brooks wrote a lengthy Sermon about the matter, which he delivered to the House of Commons ­ he being the appointed chaplain of that body. The Sermon ran to 312 printed pages in length, and he titled it, "London's Lamentations on the Late Fiery Dispensation." The several themes of the Sermon were essentially the themes of Westboro Baptist Church; to wit: that God burned London down, because of their sins and departing from the Lord, primarily because of the way London had persecuted the Puritans and other faithful preachers, and that the smart-ass, stiff-necked Londoners ­ were too stupid to recognize that God had sent the fire because of their sins, which would only bring worse and more tragedies. The blood of the old persecuted Puritan preachers cried unto God, who burned down London in His wrath. Brooks took as a text for his historically classic Sermon, two verses out of Isaiah; to wit: "Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord,  he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him  on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not  to heart." (Isa. 42:24,25)  Sunday, March 16, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  The great Prince of Preachers ­ Charles Spurgeon ­ used to tell the young preacher-boys at his Preachers' College in London: "If you would learn to preach well, drink often from the Brooks" ­ meaning that they should read often from the written works of the old Puritan preacher, Thomas Brooks (1608-1680). I believe we have everything that Brooks wrote, and everything that Spurgeon wrote, in our humble library. Brooks wrote, preached, and believed about this matter, all that the Puritans and other faithful ministers through the centuries have written, preached, and believed; to wit: "God is the author of all the plagues and judgments that befall a nation." If you don't believe that, you are a blind atheist, a fool; because, "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." Psa. 14:1.  In further expounding his 312-page Sermon about the Great Fire of London, Brooks said that God had brought the horrendous tragedy upon London because of the sins of the English people; even as God had brought devastating and final destruction upon the Jews, "As you may see (said Brooks) by comparing 2 Kgs. 23:33-37, with the 24th and 25th chapters following." Indeed, Brooks puts his text for the 312-page Sermon at the top of every single page ­ lest anybody forget Isa. 42:24-25 with its powerful message; to wit: God Sent 9/11; and, God Sent Katrina; and, God Sent The Shooter; and, God Sends Every Tragedy That Befalls Sinful Mankind. Now, Brooks points to 2 Kgs., chapters 24 and 25 as further dispositive and irrefragable proof of his proposition that, "God is the author of all the plagues and judgments that befall a nation." And, in a general way, God sends all such tragedies in punishment for the persecution of His people on earth; because, "Precious shall their blood be in His sight." Psa. 72:14.  "And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the persecuting of his sons, and of his daughters. Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries." (Deut. 32:19,43)  Thus we see, that the Lord commands all tragedies that befall the sons of men because of their persecuting His people. Is there a great tragedy? God Himself commanded it ­ because the victims of the tragedy, ­ in one way or another, ­ persecuted His people; to wit: In explanation of the horrendous destruction of the Jews, we read these words: "Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this ­ (i.e., the Babylonian Captivity) ­ upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did" ­ (filled the land with sodomites and idolatries) ­ "AND ALSO for the INNOCENT BLOOD that he shed" ­ (i.e., he persecuted God's Elect): ­ "for he filled Jerusalem with INNOCENT BLOOD" ­ (i.e., he persecuted God's Elect on a massive scale); ­ "WHICH THE LORD WOULD NOT PARDON." 2 Kgs. 24:3,4. "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." (Psa. 116:15)  Beloved. "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." Psa. 116:15. He keeps us as the apple of his eye. Deut. 32:10. He carries us upon eagles' wings. Deut. 32:11. Beloved. Our Father will redeem our soul from the deceit and violence of all our enemies; and precious shall our blood be in his sight. Psa. 72:14. Amen.  
