Sunday, May 18, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in  twain from the top to the bottom." Mat. 27:51(a).  "Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; AND THE EARTH DID QUAKE, and the rocks rent; And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Mat. 27:50-53) Truly amazing and astonishing things were coming to pass on the day they crucified our Lord Jesus Christ. "Now when the centurion (i.e., the captain over 100 Roman troops), and they that were with him, watching Jesus, SAW THE EARTHQUAKE, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God." Mat. 27:54. Gill says ­ and I certainly agree ­ that this was no "true godly fear, but a fear of punishment; lest divine vengeance should light on them, for their involvement in this matter." This guy and his 100 troops were the hotshots that mocked our Lord Jesus in Pilate's judgment hall, and were assigned especially to crucify Him and to watch Him die ­ and to break His blessed legs and thereby hasten His death, as they did the two thieves beside him, if necessary, and who unnecessarily thrust a spear into His precious side when they found Him already dead; to wit: "But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe." Jn. 19:34-36. The Holy Spirit is speaking through John in this matter, who later added at Rev. 1:7: "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him; AND THEY ALSO WHICH PIERCED HIM; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." (Rev. 1:7) Remember, also, Beloved, that this commanding Centurion was responsible and accountable for the conduct of those soldiers who stripped our Lord Jesus Christ of his humble clothing, and even cast lots for that garment which had no seam so that they could not tear it in pieces; to wit: "Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts" ­ (apparently only four of the 100 soldiers actually did the grisly work of driving the nails into His dear hands and feet ­ crucifying) ­ "and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. THESE THINGS THEREFORE THE SOLDIERS DID." Jn. 19:23,24. Remember also that although Pontius Pilate was in charge, it was the soldiers who did the actual scourging of His precious body with whips, the actual platting of the crown of thorns for pressing down upon His precious head, and the actual smiting of His dear face with their rough hands; to  Sunday, May 18, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  wit: "Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him (i.e., gave the orders to and through the  Centurion and his 100 troops). And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his  head, and they put on him a purple robe, And said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands." Jn. 19:1-3. And as our Lord Jesus hung in thirst and agony upon that rugged, Roman cross, it was the soldiers ­ the filthy, fag-ass Roman soldiers ­ who continued to mock,  and taunt, and offer vinegar to His parched lips and thirst, and to blaspheme the Holy Son of God;  to wit:  "And the people stood beholding. And the RULERS also with them derided  him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the  chosen of God. AND THE SOLDIERS also mocked him, coming to him, and  offering him vinegar, And saying, If thou be the king of the Jews, save  thyself." (Lk. 23:35-37)  And so, you see, these were not sincere comments coming out of the mouths of this Centurion and his godless troops. Read the verse again. "Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, SAW THE EARTHQUAKE, and those things that were done, THEY FEARED GREATLY, saying, Truly this was the Son of God." Mat. 27:54. This is the cry of terror: We are toast! We have been messing with the Great God Almighty! All fags mess with the Great God Almighty. Yes, there is abundant evidence that this Roman Centurion and his 100 troops were fags, because it is a well-known historical fact that Romans did not consider homosexuality harmful or sinful in any way ­ more of an innocent form of pleasant recreation. This is true of all the so-called Levant countries (those bordering the Mediterranean). Psalm 22 is a Messianic Psalm, the first verse of which is a heart-cry of the Lord Jesus from the Cross; to wit: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Psa. 22:16 is another cry of the Lord Jesus from the Cross, wherein He complains that fags ("dogs") have compassed Him about and crucified Him; to wit: "For dogs have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me; THEY PIERCED MY HANDS AND MY FEET." (Psa. 22:16) Verse 20 is another prayer of our suffering Savior, asking His Father to deliver Him from the political power of homosexuals ("dogs"); to wit: "Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the POWER OF THE DOG." Psa. 22:20. "Dogs," because of their impudence, filthiness, and libidinous nature are often put as symbols of homosexuals (fags) in Scripture. E.g., Deut. 23:17; to wit: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God...for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God." Deut. 23:17,18. "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you." Mat. 7:6."Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision." Phil. 3:2. "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. FOR WITHOUT ARE DOGS." Rev. 22:14,15. From this passage it appears that no fags are in Heaven ­ and that fags can never, ever, be ­ in Heaven. These beasts, simply, cannot repent.  Sunday, May 18, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  That Centurion and his troops ­ probably sodomites in whole, certainly sodomites in part ­ face  nothing but terror and the Great Day of God's wrath, which they are now, suddenly, brought face  to face with, by the earthquake and other displays of God's power at the death of Christ. Gill says  they were struck "by the effects of divine power." These included the darkening of the sun at  midday, the rending of the rocks and particularly heard what a loud voice with which Christ spake  and then at once expired, and other effects of the mighty earthquake.  "And it was about the sixth hour (noon), and there was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour (3:00 p.m.). And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst. And when Jesus had cried WITH A LOUD VOICE, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; and having said thus, he gave up the ghost." (Lk. 23:44-46) Earthquakes, whirlwinds, fires and floods are all ways in which God speaks to mankind ­ usually in His fierce wrath. Especially are His earthquakes and His mighty whirlwinds difficult ­ if not impossible ­ to ascribe to any other ­ and particularly any benign ­ cause. (Ariana Huffington.) God is glorified when intractable sinners are brought to terror. And the Luke account says exactly that; to wit: "Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man. And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned." (Lk. 23:47,48) Gill says that those evil people, "smote their breasts as being conscious of guilt, and as fearing some dreadful judgment would fall upon them, and their nation, for this sin of crucifying Christ. The Persic version reads, `they went back, and kneeled down, and prostrated themselves to the ground; as being in the utmost astonishment, confusion, fear, and dread.'"  Beloved, I repeat, God is glorified when evil, intractable earth-dwellers ­ impenitent & hardhearted sinners ­ are reduced to TERROR, as when God strikes them with killer storms, whirlwinds, and earthquakes. God Almighty is speaking in a clear, unmistakable voice, to mankind ­ in a language that every "nation, kindred, tongue and tribe," clearly understands. "But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world." Rom. 10:18.  "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold (i.e., hold down, choke, suppress) the truth in unrighteousness; Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God hath showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead (i.e., His Essence, His essential attributes); so that they are without excuse." (Romans 1:18-20)  Sunday, May 18, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  Beloved, think Burma, India, and China. And think, Southwest Missouri and Northeast Oklahoma. Hundreds of thousands of people are dead and dying under the wrath of God striking them with His choice earthquakes and whirlwinds. And, according to the Revelation's seven last angels of death and destruction, worse and more is on the way from an angry God; to wit:  "And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; AND THERE WAS A GREAT EARTHQUAKE, SUCH AS WAS NOT SINCE MEN WERE UPON THE EARTH, SO MIGHTY AN EARTH-QUAKE, AND SO GREAT." (Rev. 16:17,18)  On the day of Pentecost ­ fifty days after our Lord's last Passover and His resurrection ­ Peter preached his greatest sermon, (as recorded in the second chapter of the book of Acts), which launched as it were the New Testament Church. Thousands of God's Elect were supernaturally called to salvation that day, "and the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved." Acts 2:47(b). It was so arranged in the providence of God, that good, high-quality people from every nation on the globe should be in Jerusalem that day to hear Peter preach; and, amazingly, and supernaturally, every single one of those people heard Peter preach IN HIS OWN LANGUAGE. To wit:  "And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, DEVOUT MEN, out of EVERY NATION UNDER HEAVEN... (Absolutely including Burmese, Chinese and Europeans [later to become Americans]). And they were all amazed and marveled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue, where we were born? ...we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God." (Acts 2:5-11)  Without doubt, all nations heard the Gospel preached that day, and all following days when those capable, "devout men, out of every nation under heaven," returned home ­ all in the amazing providence of our sovereign God, who attends to all, and infinite, details. Moreover, the redeemed from among men include some from each nation; to wit:  "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb." (Rev. 7:9,10)  Moreover, in recent centuries some $Billions of dollars have been contributed and spent getting Bibles to the Burmese and the Chinese. (And, it might be worth mentioning, that for nearly two decades now WBC has been preaching to Burma and China ­ and the rest of the world ­ via cyberspace).  Sunday, May 18, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  As a young preacher, I read the biography of Adoniram Judson (1788-1850), a U.S. Baptist missionary to Burma, who translated the Bible into Burmese, and who was author of a Burmese dictionary. After laboring for the Burmese people for many years, he was imprisoned and suffered "extreme torture" for two years. The heroism of his wife Ann during those two years became legendary, but she died shortly thereafter. He died at sea in the Indian Ocean in 1850, after building a nationwide Baptist community with some 500,000 Burmese members. Judson authored the little poem we have informally adopted; to wit: "In spite of peril, toil, and pain; our course be onward still; We sow on Burma's barren plain; we'll reap on Zion's Hill." Burma is without excuse. Their treatment of Ann and two years of imprisonment and torture of Adoniram Judson, standing alone, would justify the cyclone that is costing Burma hundreds of thousands of lives and $Billions of loss in property.  Also, as a young preacher, I read the biography of C.T. Studd (1860-1931), written by his son-inlaw, Norman Grubb. Studd worked with the China Inland Mission, which alone spent millions of dollars seeking to make Bibles available in all the many languages and dialects of China; and Studd spent 10 years, "suffering great hardships to reach remote areas" where the Chinese said no missionaries had labored before. The Chinese persecution of Studd and Hudson Taylor and the missionaries of the China Inland Mission and the many others who for centuries have made Bibles available to the Chinese ­ is cause enough for God to send earthquakes that killed 250,000 Chinese in 1976, and for God to send the 7.9 earthquake last Monday that killed many more thousands.  It is our job, Beloved, to connect the dots for the earth-dwellers; to wit: The Burmese and the Chinese slew my servants whom I sent with a message, saith the Lord; now I will slay them, with My earthquakes and My whirlwinds and My cyclones. It is expressly written that Vengeance is one of the attributes of the God that we know and serve; to wit:  "FOR WE KNOW HIM that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge (i.e., avenge) his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:30,31) "Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man (or nation, or state, or city, etc.) by whom the offence cometh!" (Mat. 18:7) "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily." (Lk. 18:7,8)  Beloved, God's avenging killer-cyclones (front page, above the fold) for long-guilty Burma; and God's avenging killer-earthquakes (front page, above the fold) for long-guilty China. And, think, God's avenging killer-tornados (front page, above the fold) for long-guilty SW Missouri and NE Oklahoma. "I WILL REPAY, saith the Lord." (Rom. 12:19) Amen.  
