Sunday, October 7, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  Evangelical dupes led by Butterball Hagee mislead U.S.  John C. Hagee is about 5 ft. tall and about 5 ft. wide ­ a butterball with a gift of gab. He is pastor of Cornerstone Church in San Antonio, Texas, and claims to have 17,000 members. He is, of course, Arminian in his goofy theology, and he is a showman that could put Barnum & Bailey Circus hucksters to shame. Lately, Mr. Five-by-Five has taken up a rather dangerous hobby, and is telling all his followers that he knows how to fix the trouble in the Middle East.  The best I can make it out, he says God has given all of Palestine to modern Israel, and that we (the United States) must help Israel occupy it all, and drop a few nuclear bombs on Iran and anybody else that threatens to push Israel around. That way, God will bless America, willy nilly, like it says in Gen. 12:3; to wit: "I will bless them that bless thee (modern Israel), and curse him that curseth thee." ­ (That verse about God blessing them that bless thee, and cursing him that curses thee applies only to God's Elect; it applies only to Abraham's spiritual seed, which is the same as God's Elect. It applies only to the Israel of God, as the Elect are called at Gal. 6:16: "And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.") ­ Butterball has quite a following of famous Evangelical blowhards like him (men like Rod Parsley and Kenneth Copeland), and every few months they have a big meeting which they call, "A Night to Honor Israel." They hoot and holler and wave Israeli and American flags all over the huge auditorium. Butterball harangues them with threats that if we don't do something, the president of Iran will start killing Jews like Hitler did, and we will have another Holocaust on our hands. He says the 50 million Evangelicals must join forces with the 5 million Jews, because we believe the same Bible and pray to the same God. He then gets everybody in the big auditorium to scream and yell in unison, "NEVER AGAIN, NOT ON OUR WATCH." As I say, the movement seems to be growing by leaps and bounds. Rallies are planned all over America and in Israel, every few months. To all of which, I say, in very precise and scholarly theological correctness such stupidity deserves ­ HOGWASH! John C. Hagee had better go on a diet. Eat a salad. Hold the dressing. The excess fat on the Butterball has crowded out the brains ­ if he had any. The promise of God to "bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee," extended to Abraham and to his spiritual seed, i.e., to all God's Elect, just as Abraham was one of God's Elect. To all those Jews who rejected him, our Lord Jesus Christ said:  "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God; this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father. If God were your Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it." (Jn. 8:39-44)  Sunday, October 7, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  God never blessed those Jews that John Hagee is joining forces with. They reject Jesus Christ as their Messiah ­ calling him a blond-haired bastard of a European Roman soldier and a looseliving slut. God never promised those Jews anything but lives of misery and shame, and a future in Hell forever for their sins and for rejecting Christ. Our Lord Jesus called them murderers and liars. John Hagee had better wake up, and shut up, and read the Bible.  He has made common cause with demon-possessed sons of Belial, and the wrath of God abideth on him; to wit: King Jehoshaphat was returning from a trip wherein he made common cause with wicked King Ahab, wherein he nearly lost his life, and was accosted by the prophet Jehu, with these words from the Lord: "And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to King Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord." 2 Chron. 19:1,2. Should Butterball help those by spreading lies for them who have hated our blessed Savior all their lives ­ and still hate Him today ­ and therefore love them that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee, John Hagee, from before the Lord. That money you get from rich Jews isn't worth what it costs you. "What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" Mk. 8:36,37.  HATEFUL, CURSED JEWS WILL NOT ACCEPT CHRIST AND BE SAVED Besides, there is no hint that these Jews are the least bit interested in converting to Jesus Christ. They are as stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears today as they were in the days of the martyrdom of Stephen. Acts 7:51. Nor do Hagee's Jews give a hoot that the God of the Old Testament is the same God of the New Testament, and the curse that He pronounced upon the Jews then is in full force and effect today. And that curse will remain in full force and effect until Israel, as a nation, repents and turns to Jesus Christ. That day will not come until God pours upon the Jews a spirit of grace and supplications; to wit:  "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn." (Zech. 12:10) Again, Hagee's Jews have to deal with Jesus Christ; to wit: "Behold your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." (Mat. 23:38,39)  "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him." (Rev. 1:7) Until that day of national repentance shall come, at which time a nation shall be born in a day (Isa. 66:8), the Jews remain "blinded (according as it is written, God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear;) unto this day." Rom. 11:7,8, quoting Isa. 29:10.  Sunday, October 7, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  And, moreover, Hagee's Jews carry about with them everywhere they go, 24/7, the manifest evidence of the curse of God on their very countenance; to wit: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil. And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them: Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the Lord." Jer. 29:17-19.  This is the curse God put upon the Jews, and the curse that abides on them to the present time. Not a blessing; only a curse, a proverb, and a byword to the whole earth. And again, Butterball's Jews have the following curse upon them which is indelible and irradicable until the times of the Gentiles be come in; to wit:  "But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field. And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee." (Deut. 28:15,37)  It is true that God gave the land of Palestine to Abraham and his seed forever. But it is also true that Abraham's posterity departed from the Lord and were placed under an everlasting curse because of their sins. There they abide today; and there they will abide as long as they reject Christ Jesus as their Messiah; to wit: "Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in." Rom. 11:25.  All of the prophets foretold the curse that should come upon the Jews; but Roly-poly Hagee, together with idiot Evangelicals like Kenneth Copeland and Rod Parsley, think they can undo what these holy men have said, and reverse the curse upon modern Jews, even though modern Jews still reject Christ. But it won't work; to wit: "Thus saith the Lord; Ask ye now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing. Because my people hath forgotten me...To make their land desolate, and a perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head. I will scatter them as with an east wind, before the enemy; I will show them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity." Jer. 18:13-17.  Listen up, you goofy Evangelicals, led by Roly-poly! These modern Jews that you have made common cause with are under the curse of God Almighty. They hate the Lord Jesus Christ ­ openly, publicly, and viciously. What is the matter with you, making common cause with them? God has plainly told you that they are under His curse; and God has plainly told you of their character and their true nature.  Sunday, October 7, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  Read the truth about the Jews who reject Christ. Read 1 Thess. 2:14-16. Paul was a Jew, and he knew the true nature of the Jews who reject Christ. Paul said as follows about these Christrejecting Jews; to wit: They "killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men: Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost." 1 Thess. 2:15,16. Mr. Five-by-Five Hagee should memorize that passage of Scripture in First Thessalonians, and quit holding those silly, massive rallies called "A Night to Honor Israel" ­ that you call, "life-changing events."  If you just once preached the truth to those evil Jews, they would treat you like they did the disciples in the Bible. They would try to destroy you and your ministry like they did in Acts 17. Read it. "But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city in an uproar, and assaulted the house of (the disciples). And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things." Acts 17:5,8. These hateful Jews continued to persecute Paul and Silas, and were not content chasing them out of Thessalonica. We read, "But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people," so that Paul and Silas had to flee to Athens to escape their violence. Acts 17:13-15. These are very serious matters, when a cursed people like the Jews make it their lifes' work, "Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for the wrath of God is come upon modern Jewry to the uttermost." 1 Thess. 2:16. SYNCRETISM: FUSION OF TWO OR MORE  RELIGIONS INTO ONE BIG LIE John Hagee's literature is filled with cheap, anecdotal lies and irrelevancies. Like this tearjerker which he uttered upon his return from one of his many trips to Israel; to wit: "While I was praying in Jerusalem at the Western Wall, I turned and saw a Jewish man. He had a prayer shawl, reading the Bible, rocking back and forth, and I just felt that that man is my spiritual brother." Beloved, that one short anecdote is solid evidence that Dr. Butterball ­ Pastor of a 17,000-member megachurch, and Founder and Executive Director of "A NIGHT TO HONOR ISRAEL" -- is on his way to Hell with the old Jew praying at the Western Wall. In the first place, it's a lie that the old Jew was "reading the Bible." He thinks the New Testament that's all about Jesus is a pile of trash about a bastard named Jesus. Why did Hagee lie? Obviously because he wants people to believe impenitent Jews believe just like Evangelicals. But the kicker is where Hagee says, "I just felt that that man is my spiritual brother." Of course the old Christ-rejecting Jew is Hagee's spiritual brother. Neither one of them has been born again. Both of them hate the real Jesus Christ of the Bible ("who hath believed our report? He's a root out of a dry ground, without form or comeliness; and when we see him there is no beauty in him that we should desire him" Isa. 53:1-3.) Hagee's god is the great god, Syncretism. He cannot save. Syncretism means the fusion of two or more religions into one. A certain simple declaration of our Lord Jesus Christ blows Syncretism to smithereens: "I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by me." Jn. 14:6.  
