Sunday, June 24, 2007 pg. 1  Sermon Outline  Topeka, Satan's Seat  (14th Anniversary of Raid on Church)  June 22nd this week marks the 14th Anniversary of another epochal event in the life of WBC, and in the life of the World ­ as we know it. (Epochal ­ > e-p-o-c-h-a-l < ­ means an event in history that is highly significant, important, momentous).  On June 22, 1993, Satan ­ (whom God calls, "the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh (worketh: to be active, efficient, fervent, effective, mighty) in the children of disobedience.") ­ Satan stirred up the demon-possessed people of Topeka, Kansas, U.S.A., to actually commit the ultimate sacrilege ­ the ultimate desecration ­ the ultimate abomination ­ by staging an armed raid ­ a physical assault with guns and battering rams ­ upon the church of the Lord Jesus Christ ­ Westboro Baptist Church! Yes! Think of it! 20 or 30 armed officers, surrounding the church, invading the church by battering down doors, pouring over church records which mostly involved sermon preparations, seizing and hauling off thousands of dollars worth of electronic equipment and files ­ all involving the preparation and delivery of Gospel sermons.  Front page news reports said, "Shawnee County Sheriff Dave Meneley said his officers raided Westboro Baptist Church, 3701 SW 12th at 3:30 p.m. Tuesday. "(The Sheriff said) They seized computers, floppy disks, fax machines and documentation." Church documentation, indeed! (Translated: Those Nazi storm troopers seized Gospel-preaching sermon material, representing 40 years of daily and weekly Gospel preaching services by this humble pastor at this humble church of the Lord Jesus Christ.) And then those same storm troopers arrested this humble pastor and took him to jail, charged with preaching the Gospel! Well, Beloved, that made big news! The front-page-above-the-fold news of Satan's Raid on the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, flashed immediately across the nation. Every news story made a point of suggesting (perhaps unconsciously) that the motive for the Raid was our Bible preaching against the evils of homosexuals AND homosexuality. For example, the front page of the Capital-Journal called me, quote: "The Rev. Fred Phelps, pastor of the church AND ANTI-HOMOSEXUAL PROTESTER."  News of Satan's Raid brought universal joy and jubilation ­ dancing in the street ­ not only in Topeka, but throughout America. Nobody cared that the unlawful Raid violated the First Amendment religious freedom and freedom of speech guarantees which this hypocritical nation brags about throughout the world. Thus Satan's Raid not only received prior planning and approval of officials at the highest levels, but it also was ratified by every level of gov't and religion and by all the people of Topeka, Kansas, and the U.S.A. Not one preacher of the 1 million preachers, priests and rabbis that infest this nation called in support of WBC after the Raid. Thus, they all supported the Raid. Remember, at the time of the Raid, we had been picketing against the sodomite menace for 2 years on a daily basis. Our so-called antihomosexual protests, were and are nothing other than faithful Bible preaching. God Hates Fags, Fags Doom Nations, Fags Die ­ God Laughs, and many more such signs had become familiar across America and around the world ­ thanks to a hostile media.  Sunday, June 24, 2007 pg. 2  Sermon Outline  "The Power of the Dog"  Thus, there is no doubt about it, Satan's Raid on WBC was entirely because fags and fagenablers completely dominate America at every level of government and society generally. God's Word calls this phenomenon "The Power of the Dog (dogs being a Bible reference to sodomites)." Psa. 22:20: "Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog." This verse is a part of the prayer of our Lord Jesus as he was hanging on the cross awaiting death. See Psa. 22:16: "For dogs (sodomites) have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet." There is no question but that Psa. 22 is a Messianic Psalm, and these are the words of our dying Savior. And there is no question but that "dogs" are put for sodomites in the Scripture. See, Deut. 23:17 & 18, and Rev. 22:15. To wit: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God... for these are abomination unto the Lord thy God." Dt. 23:17,18.  And in the last chapter of the Bible, Rev. 22, having described and identified somewhat of the joys of Heaven, the Lord then names 6 categories of people who will never see Heaven, ­ BEGINNING WITH SODOMITES! (DOGS)! To wit: "For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie." Rev. 22:15. Indeed, a literal rendering from the original, such as that used by Dr. James Kennedy of Coral Ridge Presbyterian Church, Ft. Lauderdale, in reading this passage from Rev. 22 in his sermon last Sunday, translates it like this: "For without are HOMOSEXUALS (i.e., `DOGS')." It is, therefore, beyond dispute: Satan's Raid on WBC 14 years ago on June 22, 1993, was the work of fags and fag-enablers ­ wrought by "the power of the dog." "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily," (Luke 18:7-8), according to these words directly from the mouth of the Lord Jesus Christ. Those officials having a hand in the outrage are long gone, including three suicides, one murder, three ousters from office, and a host of other tragedies befalling these criminals. A chief justice of the supreme court and a chief judge of the U.S. District Court blew their brains out. One also killed his wife before killing himself. The son of the demon-possessed judge who signed the lying search warrant that triggered Satan's Raid upon WBC, and the fraudulent criminal charges against Pastor Phelps ­ that evil judge's son blew his brains out. The wrath of God is vindicating the humble souls at WBC. Katrina and Greensburg are further examples of God Almighty's vengeance upon a fag nation that raids His little church for preaching God's Truth about fag sins. Every American soldier blown to bits by a lowly IED in Iraq ­ returned to this Godforsaken country in little pieces in a body bag ­ is screaming out in Hell: "Why in God's Name did you Raid WBC?!" "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily." (Luke 18:7-8)  Sunday, June 24, 2007 pg. 3  Sermon Outline  America is irreversibly doomed for promoting the unholy, abominable fag agenda and for  raiding and otherwise oppressing WBC for preaching God's Word to you: God Hates Fags!  America will learn through her total destruction and her eternal retribution in the fires of  Hell, that God does not make idle threats:  "He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings  for their sakes; Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my  prophets (WBC) no harm." Psa. 105:14,15.  "For we know him that hath said, `Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge (avenge) his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." Heb. 10:30-31. After years of litigation ­ all the way to the Supreme Court and back ­ all charges were ultimately dismissed ­ no thanks to those who launched Satan's Raid against WBC. And only one official of the many who conspired, planned and participated in the Raid ever apologized to WBC for their crimes against the church of Jesus Christ. "Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me; for I will not hear thee." Jer. 7:16. Ergo, it is a sin to pray for Church Raiding America. "Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?" Jer. 5:29. Despite God's punishments in vengeance for Satan's Raid and other crimes against WBC, fag American sinners continue in stubborn rebellion and the sins of Sodom. "For the people turneth not unto Him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. Therefore the Lord will cut off from (America) head and tail, branch and rush, in one day. The ancient and honorable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed." Isa. 9:13-16. These are Bible metaphors meaning God will cast them, soul and body, into Hell. Christ said, "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell." Mat. 10:28. "For it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell." Mat. 5:29-30. Make no mistake, all you impenitent Church Raiders: There's plenty of room in Hell for every last, single person living in Topeka, and in Kansas, and in the U.S.A. ­ and this fact is made clear in the same passage of Scripture that identifies "Topeka" as a name meaning "Hell" itself: Isa. 30:33. To-wit: "For Tophet (Topeka) is ordained of old; yea, for (or, "by") the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep (bottomless) and wide (borderless); the pile thereof is fire and much wood (the bodies of the damned ­ Church Raiders); the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it (doth guarantee its eternal burning)." Isa. 30:33. We have proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Topeka, Kansas, U.S.A. is now where Satan's seat, throne, dwelling, operational headquarters, from which he directs myriads of fallen angels and demon spirits in his global campaign of evil. Rev. 2:13.  Sunday, June 24, 2007 pg. 4  Sermon Outline  Topeka, KS = Satan's Seat  The objective evidence is overwhelming. First, Topeka's Zip Code is 666, which means that Topeka is the one and only spot on earth that identifies itself by name and location with the Mark of the Beast ­ 666. Hundreds of millions of times a year ­ on a daily basis ­ year in, year out ­ a veritable tidal wave of paper marked "Topeka, Kansas, U.S.A., 666, flows in and out of this evil place. That startling fact settles this issue for all those with wisdom and understanding ­ and nobody else matters; to wit: "Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count (i.e., compute, or figure a secretly-coded thing out) the number of the beast; for it is 666." Rev. 13:18. The mission of the Beast (Satan) is to destroy the people and messengers of God on earth; to-wit: "And it was given unto him (the Beast) to make war with the saints." Rev. 13:7.  When they see Satan's Raid on WBC, those who have Bible knowledge and wisdom understand immediately that Satan's Raid on a church is the work of the Beast; that Topeka, Kansas, U.S.A., is the place where Satan's Raid took place; that Topeka is identified prominently throughout the world as the only spot on earth proudly wearing the Mark of the Beast, 666; and that such an amazing confluence of circumstances can only mean one thing; to-wit: Topeka, Kansas, U.S.A., is where Satan's throne is located at this time in these momentous last days of the last days. Then when we add to 666, that Topeka calls itself The Golden City (the moniker of Babylon, arch enemy of the people of god, Isa. 14:4, just as Topeka is the arch enemy of WBC); and that Topeka's God-defying mascot is the Ichabod (meaning the glory of God has departed from this place); none can deny with a straight face that Topeka is where Satan's seat is. But there is one thing more ­ like icing on the cake: the very name of "Topeka" is one of the Bible names for "Hell." Early French trappers on maps called the place "topage" ­ which means "a noisy din" (a din is a mixture of loud and discordant notes) ­ which was a meaning of the Hebrew word "Tophet" in the Valley of Hinnom (from which we get two words for "Hell" ­ "Tophet" Isa. 30:33, and "Gehenna" Mk. 9:43,45,47.) English settlers put "Topeka" for "Topage" = "Tophet" = "Hell."  Expounding Isa. 30:33, ("For Tophet is ordained of old") John Gill says: "This was a valley near Jerusalem, the valley of the son of Hinnom; so-called, from the drums and tabrets beat upon here, to prevent parents hearing the cries of their infants offered to Molech; into it was brought the filth and dung of the city; here malefactors were buried, it is said; and such as were condemned to burning were burned here; and such as had no burial were cast here; so that it was an image and picture of hell itself...He hath made it deep and large; and so Hell is large and deep enough to hold Satan and his angels, antichrist and all his followers; yea, all the wicked that have been from the beginning of the world, and will be to the end of it. The wrath of God, as a continual stream of brim-stone, keeps up the fire of it, so that it ever burns, unquenchable." Topeka, Ks., USA = Tophet = Hell. Isaiah 30:33 For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.  
