Sunday, April 20, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "And the upright shall have dominion over them  in the morning (resurrection)." Psa. 49:14.  That passage of Scripture is not a whole verse. It's not even half of a verse. It's a third of a verse. And it's beautiful, tucked in there in the big middle of the verse ­ between the first third and the last third. The context is glorious ­ both the immediate context ­ verses 13 and 15 ­ and the larger sweep of the whole psalm of 20 verses. The happy psalmist plugs in a "Selah" for emphasis behind both verses 13 and 15 ­ surrounding verse 14 ­ as it were ­ with "Selahs" as though he had run out of exclamation marks. He is finding happy thoughts in the inevitable ­ and rapidly approaching -death and disfigurement by rotting flesh of the wicked. And right in the big middle of it all is the happiest of all thoughts; to wit: That God will "take" us ­ even as He "took" Enoch, to not only be with Him forever in Heaven, but that, we shall reign with Him over the wicked ­ and sit with Him as fellow judges with Him, in judging the hateful persecutors of earth. Listen, Beloved: "And the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning (the time of our glorious resurrection)." Psa.49:14. ("Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh IN THE MORNING." Psa. 30:5). Now hear the beautiful context of that most blessed announcement in Psa. 49:13-15; to wit:  "This their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings. Selah. Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; AND THE UPRIGHT SHALL HAVE DOMINION OVER THEM IN THE MORNING: and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling. But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall receive me (i.e., "take me," as in "Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God TOOK him). Selah." (Gen. 5:24)  Beloved, just as God raptured Enoch, even so shall God, in due time, rapture us by giving us new and immortal bodies. "But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive me (take me, rapture me)". Psa. 49:13-15. Now this wonderful text points us immediately and directly to the majestic language of the Holy Spirit in the glorious resurrection chapter in 1 Corinthians 15; to wit: "Behold, I show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed," ­ (Job said, "If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my CHANGE come. Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee; thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands." Job 14:14,15. We shall all be CHANGED.) ­ "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: ­ (think, Jubilee! Beloved, our Jubilee has come at last, when we are finally set free from all our sins and afflictions and the wrath of man which we have suffered for so long in our service for the King, "choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt". Heb. 11:25,26. Being obliged time and again to say, "the reproaches of them that reproached thee have fallen upon me." (Rom. 15:3; Psa. 69:9)) (1 Corinthians 15:5152).  "For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter." (Rom. 8:36)  Sunday, April 20, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  I say, Beloved, our Year of Jubilee will come at last, as we looked at last Sunday in the 25th Chapter  of Leviticus; to wit: "Then shalt thou cause the Trumpet of the Jubile to sound on the tenth day of  the seventh month, in the Day of Atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your  land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth Year, and PROCLAIM LIBERTY THROUGHOUT THE LAND." Lev. 25:9,10. Now, the last day has come, and the last trumpet has sounded, announcing glorious things for God's Elect. At the last trump ­ For the trumpet shall sound, ­ yes, Beloved, the  LAST TRUMPET SHALL SOUND, and it would be difficult for us to make too much of that Last Trumpet, and so much the more as we see the day approaching. Trumpets are found all throughout the Scriptures. Trumpets called the Jews to battle, and to ceremonial observances, and to sound the  alarm when danger threatened, and for numerous other important occasions ­ all symbolizing and  pointing to this Last Trumpet, that shall signal the End of the World. Listen to these wonderful,  startling and majestic words from the lips of our Savior; to wit:  "And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall  all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming  in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he shall send his  angels with a great sound of a TRUMPET, and they shall gather together his  elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." (Mat.  24:30,31)  And listen to these fearful words of terror and warning of the wrath of God, as He thundered from Mt. Sinai as the law was delivered, "when the TRUMPET SOUNDETH LONG"; to wit:  "The Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai. And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death: There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live; WHEN THE TRUMPET SOUNDETH LONG, they shall come up to the mount." (Ex. 19:11-13) The experience with the trumpet sounding long on Mt. Sinai was so traumatizing, that even the mighty Moses is reported by the apostle to the New Testament church as saying, "I exceedingly fear and quake." Heb. 12:21. And, what is more sobering to us in the church age, is the fact that our Lord Jesus Christ is represented as speaking to the churches in this dispensation with a great voice, as of a TRUMPET; to wit: "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice AS OF A TRUMPET, Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; and, What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia." Rev. 1:10,11. And, "After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven; and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a TRUMPET talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be hereafter." Rev. 4:1. And, the final and unspeakable woes upon doomed mankind are announced by angels utilizing trumpets; to wit:  Sunday, April 20, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  "And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying  with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth by reason of  the other VOICES OF THE TRUMPET of the three angels, which are yet to  sound!" (Rev. 8:13)  And, the apostle intimates that the doctrine of the LAST TRUMPET, and the glorious happenings in heaven and earth in connection therewith, are calculated to comfort the suffering saints as nothing else can; to wit: "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the TRUMP OF GOD; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord (irrespective of all the abstruse or obscure nuances of eschatology ­ the recondite doctrines of last things ­ SO SHALL WE EVER BE WITH THE LORD!). Wherefore COMFORT one another with these words." 1 Thes. 4:16-18. (These are plain and simple words, easily understood, and very comforting.)  "And the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we (God's Elect) shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:52-55) Recall our text again; to wit: "The upright (God's Elect) shall have dominion over them (the nonElect, who persecuted God's Elect on earth) in the morning (the Resurrection)." Psa. 49:14. The old Puritans called God's Elect, "the sons of the morning," referring to our text. "The upright shall have dominion over them in the morning."  Expounding this passage, Thomas Manton (1620-1677) said, "When Christ cometh to judgment, his saints come to judge the world with him. (Jude 14: `Behold, the Lord cometh with myriads of his saints, to execute judgment upon all.' Jude 14.) When the wicked are filled with amazement, they come in Christ's company, partly that the world may know what shall be done to the men whom God will honor, and that Christ may be `admired' in the glory he putteth upon them, 2 Thes. 1:10; partly that Christ may make them partakers of the mediatory kingdom; therefore they are associated with him in judging the world, Mat. 19:28; their suffrage is required as approving the sentence of the Judge, 1 Cor. 6:2; partly for the greater sorrow of the wicked; they shall be judged by mean (lowly) men, whom they once hated and persecuted; Psa. 49:14, `The upright shall have dominion over them in the morning,' that is, of the resurrection; they counted their lives madness and folly, but now they are exalted; partly to make amends for the perverse censures of worldly men; now they are judged every day, counted the off-scouring and reproach of men; but then the Lord will clear up their innocency, and they shall sit as Justices with the Judge upon the Bench. When wicked men come like miserable captives, how shall the saints arise out of their graves like `sons of the morning,' they and angels inter-mixed in the train of Christ! What is wanting here is richly made up there. Walk as those that shall be associated with Christ in judging the world; walk with Christ now, and you shall come with him then; `Follow the Lamb withersoever he goeth.' When he is crowned at  Sunday, April 20, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  Hebron he will not forget his old companions; cleave to him, cry not up a confederacy with them that  cry up a confederacy against him. He will say to you, You have been with me in all my sufferings  and sorrows, now you shall be with me in my glory, Mat. 19:27,28. Again, judge the world now,  condemn them by your lives, as knowing that you shall condemn them hereafter by your vote and  your suffrage. Noah `condemned the world,' Heb. 11:7. A sincere Christian is a living reproof; a  carnal professing hypocrite justifieth the wicked; `Ye have justified your sister Sodom,' see Ezek.  16; but a sincere Christian condemneth them."  Thus we have, as it were, the bottom slice of bread, together with the center slice of lunchmeat for our Psa. 49:13-15, three-verse sandwich. Now for the top slice of bread, a/k/a verse 13, to complete the sandwich; to wit: "This their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings. Selah." Psa. 49:13. The sayings of George Washington are approved by all of this God-cursed, doomed America. For example, Washington's Farewell Address. Likewise the sayings of Thomas Jefferson. Such as our revered Declaration of Independence. And so are the sayings of Benjamin Franklin, and his Poore Richard's Almanac of witty sayings. Take these three as the cream of the crop, so to speak. Look at them, and how they treated the Bible and the church. I tell you, they are all in Hell. There is no doubt about it! They are one and all in Hell. Yet this nation ­ their posterity ­ idolizes them ­ and worships them, and their flag, and their demon-possessed country they spawned. Yet, George Washington was a pagan, sacrilegious, blaspheming, idolatrous Freemason to the day he died ­ rejecting the divinity of Christ in favor of his fellow slave-holding Jewish Freemason Brethren. I do not believe it is possible to be a Christian AND a Freemason; and George Washington was a primary leader among Freemasons.  Thomas Jefferson went through the Bible and cut out all passages declaring the divinity of Christ, and leaving only those parts portraying Christ as nothing but a good teacher of ethics. Heretics, to this day, refer to that Bible as the Jefferson Bible. Jefferson ­ who fornicated freely with his female slave ­ had a lot of nerve talking about ethics. Benjamin Franklin was a womanizing old fool all his days, who rejected Christ and the Bible, and thought the nation was better off without what the Puritans of his day called, "Sincere Christianity" ­ meaning that it was a dangerous thing to REALLY BELIEVE what the Bible says. Truly, "This their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings." Selah. Truly, our so-called Founding Fathers were demon-possessed. "And the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning." Psa. 49:14. "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?...Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" 1 Cor. 6:2,3.  "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him. Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me; but I kept the matter in my heart...But go thou thy way till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days." (Dan. 7:27, 28 &12:13) Amen.  
