Sunday, July 15, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  We Have Come to this Hour to FRAY Them  From the Prophet Zechariah, World Champion of the Art of Holy Enigmas, Mysteries, Parables, and Similitudes (figures of speech). "I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10. "Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful (i.e., in the context, faithful in interpreting and expounding the mysteries)." 1 Cor. 4:1,2. "And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables? He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given." Mat. 13:10,11. Take, for example, the following enigmatic prophecy from Zech. 1:18-21; to wit: "Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns. And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem." ("Four" speaks of universality ­ they are everywhere ­ as we speak of the four corners of the earth, meaning "everywhere," and the four winds, and North, South, East and West ­ meaning "everywhere." "Horns" speak of aggressive, pushy, destructive governmental and other world powers to persecute and dominate. "Judah, Israel and Jerusalem" often in Scripture refer to God's Elect. "Scattered" refers to what the Jews call The Diaspora which began with the blood bath of the Babylonian Captivity, and continues to this day with the dispersal and bloody persecution of the Jews throughout the world [hence the term "scattered"] throughout the past 2,600 years of history, and which is generally considered to be infinitely worse than the dreaded Nazi Holocaust which is said to have resulted in the bloody murders of 6 million Jews. And so, the word "Scattered" here refers to the bloody persecution of God's Elect throughout the world, in every age. And note that what these four hateful, horned beasts did to God's Elect ­ referred to euphemistically as "Scattered", but which was in fact vicious, bloody persecution ­ is mentioned 3 times in these 4 verses. "Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns. And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. And the Lord showed me four carpenters. Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head; but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it." Zech. 1:18-21  Sunday, July 15, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  Continue the text at Zech. 1:20,21; to wit: "And the Lord showed me four carpenters.  Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These (eliminate, `are the')  horns ­ Just read it, "These horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up  his head; but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles (heathen),  which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it." Zech. 1:18-21. (Now for  more exposition: These "Four Carpenters" are none other than God's Elect ­ His holy ones  and watchers, ministers, seers, preachers and prophets. They are called "Carpenters" or  "Artificers," or "skilled workmen," because they have a delicate work to do. These are not a  singing group from the 70s like some members of this church ­ who shall remain nameless ­  think.  These are Tachmonites and David's Mighty Men ­ all of whom are battle-fit and prepared for war; to wit: "For thou hast girded me with strength to battle; them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me. Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies." 2 Sam. 22:40,41. (More exposition: These evil horns ­ [wicked men wielding governmental power over God's Elect] ­ have persecuted God's Elect with such vicious cruelty for so long, "so that no man did lift up his head." Meaning that no man could "go with an erect stature; but, through oppression, sorrow, and misery, was obliged to stoop, and bow, and hang down his head." See, Gill. (Bang!) "But these are come to fray them!" More, Gill: "These Carpenters are come to fright the horns, to put terror into those kings and those kingdoms...All which may be applied to the ministers of the Gospel, who are workmen; and whose business it is to fray or terrify the horns, wicked men, even men in power, the enemies of Christ's church and people ­ by their preaching, their prayers, and their godly lives and testimony. "But these are come to fray them!" Zech. 1:21  To FRAY means to cause the heathen oppressors (horns) to shudder, quake and tremble with terror, even as we destroy them by our prayers and preaching. The beautiful message of our power to fray (terrorize to their doom) our oppressors, is couched in a wonderful context: Before the 4-verse message are these words: "The Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem." Zech. 1:17. Following the 4-verse message are these comforting words: "For he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of His eye." Zech. 2:8(b). "For thus saith the LORD of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye." Zechariah 2:8  Think battle ax and weapons of war; "for with thee will I break in pieces the nations and with thee will I destroy kingdoms". Jer. 51:20. Think, new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: "Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth; thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff." Isa. 41:14,15.  Sunday, July 15, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  In the Last Days of All ­ the Last of the Last Days ­ our duty is to "Study" ­ i.e., give all  diligence ­ to rightly dividing ­ or portioning out ­ or applying ­ the "Word of Truth" ­ i.e.,  the Bible ­ (2 Tim. 2:15) ­ to the events on the ground ­ i.e., to "The Signs of the Times"  accurately discerned. Matt. 16:3. What Bible verses ­ Bible doctrines ­ apply to the here  and now? Our primary duty: Accurately Discern the signs of the times ­ (what the heck is  going on) ­ and apply the verses (the Doctrines) that fit. Nehemiah's good advice applies  here: "So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused  them to understand the law." Neh. 8:8.  First, none but the Church of the Lord Jesus is equipped and empowered to make such determinations; because to no other man or association of men did the Lord Jesus Christ bestow such remarkable power: "Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye (the Church) shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." Mat. 18:18. The context shows beyond any doubt that the Lord Jesus Christ is talking to His Church ­ and He appears to indicate here and elsewhere that His True Church will usually be very small: "For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." Mat. 18:20. Beloved, You just can't get any smaller than that. Yet it is to this tiny group (2 or 3 people) that the Lord Jesus confers such power: "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth... and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth"...are already so bound and loosed in Heaven (i.e., what doctrines are true and applicable to what situation, and what doctrines are false and/or not applicable) ­ are already so bound and loosed in Heaven.  TERRIBLE AS AN ARMY WITH BANNERS  Speaking prophetically of the Church, Solomon said: "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?" Song of Solomon 6:10. Gill: "A banner displayed is an indication of war; it is to prepare for it, and to animate to it. This informs us that the Church on earth is militant, and therefore is represented as formidable and terrible as an army with banners; she has many enemies to engage with, as sin, Satan, and the world, and yet has the greatest encouragement to fight, for she is bannered under the Lord of hosts." See, Song of Solomon 6:4,10.  The young couple ­ Aquila and Priscilla ­ give us another example of a True Church. They met up with Paul at Corinth, "a certain Jew named Aquila, lately come from Italy with his wife Priscilla...And because Paul was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought (worked together, about 3 years); for by their occupation they were tentmakers." Acts 18:1-3. When Paul left Corinth, he took Priscilla and Aquila with him: "And Paul after this tarried there (Corinth) yet a good while, and then took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila." Acts 18:18. Later, it appears that a tiny but wonderful church was established, and met, in Rome, at the house of Priscilla and Aquila, to wit: "Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus; Who have for my life laid down their own necks; unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles. Likewise greet the church that is in their house." Rom. 16:3,4. Later it appears that another tiny church was established, and met, in Asia, at the home of Priscilla and Aquila, to wit: "The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house." 1 Cor. 16:19.  Sunday, July 15, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  The one, essential ingredient in a True Church is the presence of Christ ­ He is the sine qua  non (without which, nothing) ­ to wit: "For where (even) two or three are gathered  together in my name, THERE AM I, in the midst of them." Mat. 18:20. "If ye walk in my  statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; Then ...I will set my tabernacle among  you; and my soul shall not abhor you ­ (note the inescapable conclusion: He abhors all the  rest). And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people." Lev.  26:3,11,12 ­ (note this Old Testament reference).  "For ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people." 2 Cor. 6:16.  "Know ye not that ye ­ (ye, plural, collectively, a body corporate) ­ are the temple of God, and that the Sprit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God,  him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."  1 Cor. 3:16,17.  "Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 1 Pet. 2:5. And how did they get to be lively, or living, stones? Here's how: "Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him." Jn. 14:23. "And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks ­ (and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches). And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man." Rev. 1:12,13.  When we say that Westboro Baptist Church is Golden Candlestick University, we are referring to this passage. We say with Moses, in response to the Lord's promise: "And he (God) said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. And he (Moses) said unto him (God), If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence." Ex. 33:14,15. "There am I in the midst of them." Mat. 18:20. In that humble place (a tiny church) the most important transactions of time and eternity take place. The following prophesy of Daniel holds that breathtaking fact: "This matter (as to who rules the world and all inferior powers) is by the decree of the watchers (God's Elect), and the demand by the word of the holy ones (God's Elect); to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men." Dan. 4:17. "And who is sufficient for these things?" We are! Because we are not as the multitudes which corrupt the Word of God. We handle that Word with sincerity. 2 Cor. 2:16,17.  CONNECT THESE DOTS: Whatsoever ye shall bind (Mat. 18:18) + We have come to fray them (Zech. 1:21) + Hew down the tree! (Dan. 4:14). Amen.  Whatsoever ye shall bind (Matthew 18:18)  We have come to fray them (Zech. 1:21)  Hew down the tree! (Dan. 4:14)  
