Sunday, December 2, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  "You hath he quickened who were dead." Eph. 2:1.  Doyle Cannon ­ then-pastor of Central Church of Christ, located at Huntoon & College Streets, here in Topeka ­ SAID: ­ (in a 4-night, 12-hour debate he had with me exactly 50 years ago) ­ Doyle Cannon said: "FRED PHELPS MAKES THAT DEAD MAN TOO DEAD;" to wit: "You hath he quickened who were DEAD." Eph. 2:1. A little further down in Ephesians, Chapter Two, are these words: "But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we were DEAD in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his KINDNESS toward us through Christ Jesus. For by GRACE are ye saved through FAITH; and THAT not of yourselves: it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are HIS WORKMANSHIP, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them." (Eph. 2:4-10) Doyle Cannon's church at Huntoon & College Streets is what the old-timers called a Campbellite church ­ named after its founder, Alexander Campbell, who himself was raised as a Calvinistic, Old School, Primitive (some say a Hardshell, or TULIP) BAPTIST ­ who went to seed over one verse (Acts 2:38) and became an Arminian, Free-Will, Baptismal-Regeneration heretic, whose followers of the sect he founded are called CAMPBELLITES. As I said, old Alexander went to seed over Acts 2:38, ­ joined the Baptists in 1813, and DISSOCIATED from the Baptists in 1830 to start up his own church ­ whose outward distinguishing characteristics are rejection of all musical instruments at worship services, and insistence that one must be baptized in water by immersion in order to be saved, ala Acts 2:38; to wit: "Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38) As I say, these are the two OUTWARD things that stamp every Campbellite. In the reality of things, Campbellites are nothing more than another brand of God-loves-everybody Arminians, who hate, mock and ridicule all TULIP Baptists, like Westboro Baptist Church. In other words, Campbellites hate the Gospel. "FRED PHELPS MAKES THAT DEAD MAN TOO DEAD!" When Campbellite preacher Doyle Cannon ­ in a public debate with me fifty years ago ­ bellowed out, "FRED PHELPS MAKES THAT DEAD MAN TOO DEAD!" he was merely expressing his hatred for the first doctrine of Calvinism ­ that for which the "T" in the acronym T-U-L-I-P stands; to wit: "Total Depravity." Mankind virulently HATES the doctrine of TOTAL DEPRAVITY ­ that natural man is dead in his sins, and can do nothing whatsoever to either save himself or help save himself. Cut to the chase! Natural man cannot even BELIEVE for himself, which is exactly what every Arminian in the world says he MUST DO (and which  Sunday, December 2, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  is well within his power TO DO) in order to be saved. Speaking to the dead man, the heretic  says, "If you will only take the first step, God will help you the rest of the way." The dead man  says nothing, of course. After all, he's dead, you know. The TULIP Baptist says, "He cannot  believe. He is dead, dead, dead." The Arminian heretic replies, in the words of Doyle Cannon,  "FRED PHELPS MAKES THAT DEAD MAN TOO DEAD." Then the Arminian heretic tells  one of his favorite little stories, ­ by way of encouraging the dead man to help raise himself  from the dead ­ about the lying Roman Catholic legend of St. Dennis; to wit: "St. Dennis was  slain as a martyr, by having his head cut off. Thereupon, St. Dennis picked up his own head,  and walked a thousand miles." To which the TULIP Baptist says, "Never mind the thousand  miles. That's nothing. I'll give him the thousand miles. If a headless man ­ a man who has his  head cut off is certainly dead, dead, dead ­ I say, if a headless man can pick up his head and  take the first step ­ just one step ­ I'll give him the thousand miles. And I will concede that he  doesn't need help with the thousand miles ­ just with the first step."  "NOW FRED PHELPS HAS GOT GOD DOING THE BELIEVING FOR YOU."  Along in there is when Campbellite preacher Doyle Cannon blurted out what he thought was a sure-fire winner in the debate fifty years ago; to wit: "NOW FRED PHELPS HAS GOT GOD DOING THE BELIEVING FOR YOU." At which I jumped up (in front of hundreds) and announced, "By George, he's got it. He's finally got it." Saving faith is a supernatural gift of God. It is as though God passed by a muddy, bloody, dead corpse, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the corpse became vibrant with life and health. There is no need ­ in fact, it's folly ­ to say to that dead corpse, "If you will take the first step, by exercising your faith, God will take over from there."  CHARLES G. FINNEY (1792-1875), OLD-TIME ARMINIAN HERETIC  The Encyclopaedia Britannica ­ of all places ­ seems to have seen the folly of such theology. In writing of the Arminian preacher Charles G. Finney (1792-1875), the Britannica says, "His theology was typical of all the revivalists, emphasizing MAN'S INITIATIVE in conversion and ability to make himself a new heart by his own choice. As did other revivalists, Finney tended to make the test of the truth of the doctrine preached its effectiveness in getting results, namely converts."  I heard Billy Graham once describe and define the faith that will get one to Heaven. He said something like this, as a prelude to his so-called "Altar Call", as the choir sang, "Just As I Am;" to wit: "Faith is such a simple thing. Every person has faith, that he uses every day. When you came in here tonight, you just sat down in the chair that was provided you. You didn't turn the chair upside down and examine the screws, nuts and bolts that held the chair together, to be sure you would be safe sitting in it. No. You had faith that the people who made the chair, sold the chair, delivered the chair, set the chair up in the auditorium tonight ­ all were looking out for your safety. When you drove your car to the meeting tonight, and came to a hill, so that you could not see the other side of the hill to be sure the highway kept going on the other side of the hill ­ you didn't pull your car over to the side of the road, and walk up to the top of the hill, to be sure the highway kept going on the other side of the hill. No. You had faith that the people responsible for the highway had your safety in mind. You exercised your simple, everyday faith, and probably never gave it a thought but that the highway kept going and was safe to drive on,  Sunday, December 2, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  on the other side of the hill. NOW, all you have to do is use that same simple faith, and take  Christ as your savior, and trust Him as you would the chair-maker and the highway  maintenance department. Come forward and simply trust Christ, as we sing, `Just As I Am.'"  "FOR ALL MEN HAVE NOT FAITH." (2 THES. 3:2) No, no, Beloved. There's all the difference in the world between the supernatural faith of God's Elect that leads to salvation; and the common faith of all mankind that is a natural part of human existence. "All men have NOT faith ­ (i.e., All men have not the supernatural faith of God's elect ­ indeed, very, very few men have the faith of God's Elect)." 2 Thes. 3:2. The context of the declaration that "All men have not faith," is rather startling; to wit: "Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and have free course and be glorified, even as it is with you: And that we may be DELIVERED FROM UNREASONABLE AND WICKED MEN: FOR ALL MEN HAVE NOT FAITH." (2 Thes. 3:1,2) So, you see, Billy Graham is a liar. It is a Satanic perversion of the truth to say that the same kind of simple faith that all men are possessed with ­ when turned to believing in Christ ­ simply take Jesus as your savior, and trust in Him ­ is all that is needed for salvation. No. It is an Arminian lie ­ and it is dangerous. And those evil men who preach that lie are themselves to be warned of and prayed to be delivered from; to wit: "Pray for us...that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: FOR ALL MEN HAVE NOT FAITH. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil." 2 Thes. 3:1-3. "THAT WE MAY BE DELIVERED FROM UNREASONABLE AND WICKED MEN." (2 THES. 3:2) The warning is serious, and to be taken seriously, as in Phil. 3:1-3; to wit: "Finally, my brethren...for you it (i.e., the WARNING) ­ for you it is safe. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision (i.e., religious folks, Arminian to the core). For we are the circumcision, ­ (the true children of Abraham, who is `the father of all them that believe.') Rom. 4:11. " "Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham." (Gal. 3:7.) ­ I say, "we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh." Phil. 3:1-3.  THE ONLY FAITH THAT SAVES THE SOUL IS CALLED IN THE BIBLE "THE FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT." Titus 1:1; to wit: "Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness; In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began." Tit. 1:1,2.  And so you see, without the supernatural FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT, there is no apostleship, there is no ultimate, absolute TRUTH, there is no godliness, and there is no hope of eternal life. THE FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT is also the personal FAITH OF JESUS CHRIST; to wit: "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by THE FAITH OF JESUS CHRIST, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by THE FAITH OF CHRIST... I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by THE FAITH OF THE SON OF GOD, who loved me, and gave himself for me." (Gal. 2:16,20)  Sunday, December 2, 2007 pg.4 Beloved, this is a great mystery:  Sermon Outline  "Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from  generations, but now is made manifest to his saints: TO WHOM God  would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery  among the Gentiles; which is CHRIST IN YOU, the hope of glory."  (Col. 1:26,27)  "For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." (Phil. 2:13) The Southern Baptist Convention came out last Tuesday with the results of a survey they took of recent seminary graduates; and they reported that 34 percent of those recent graduates now serving in Southern Baptist Churches identified themselves as five-point Calvinists. Whereas, only 10 percent of SBC pastors generally identified themselves as five-point Calvinists.  NOT ONE SOUTHERN BAPTIST PREACHER IS A 5-POINT CALVINIST Based upon my 60 years of experience dealing with preachers ­ including Southern Baptists ­ not one, either of the 34 percent of the recent graduates, or the 10 percent of the old-timers, EVER preaches a Calvinistic sermon. If he did, he'd soon be out of a job.  Beloved, not only do preachers fail and refuse to preach Calvinism, ­ (which is nothing other than the Gospel, rather than the God-loves-everybody Arminian lies that they all preach, instead of the Gospel) ­ but all American preachers are engaged in a massive conspiracy to silence all Calvinistic preaching.  Coincidentally, there came to my desk last week an advertisement to sell an Internet FILTER guaranteed to FILTER OUT all references whatever to Calvinism! The blurb said, "Net Finney ­ The most popular CALVINIST INTERNET FILTER out there today. It's saved millions of unsuspecting Christians from being infected with Reformed (CALVINISTIC) theology."  The cost of this filter is regularly $40, but with a 50% Xmas discount. You should have a copy of this advertising piece with your handouts. I'm not sure what to make of it, but those people certainly do know about the acronym "TULIP," ­ T-U-L-I-P ­ in its theological context.  On one side of the advertising piece is a big field of tulips growing in the sun that takes up about one-third of the space. On the other side at the lower right is a row of little tulips, ticking off some kind of time or number, with a slow-moving turtle superimposed over the row of tulips. Then, the package containing the Internet Calvinist Filter ­ in addition to having the name "Net Finney" in big letters, has a picture of Charles G. Finney, ­ AND, the big words, "With TULIP control."  The significance of having the picture of Charles G. Finney (1792-1875), and the words, "Net Finney. With TULIP control," on the filter package, is that Finney was a famous Arminian preacher of days gone by, who debated Calvinists of his day, and founded and was president of Oberlin College near Cleveland, Ohio, which is now a hotbed of fags, and which we picketed a while back for blatantly hiring an openly-gay athletic director, and bragging about it to the whole world.  Sunday, December 2, 2007 pg.5  Sermon Outline  THE PREACHERS ARE TO BLAME, & ARE CURSED OF GOD  Thus, you see how easily this generation of proud perverts was spawned by yesterday's Arminian, God-loves-everybody, anti-Calvinist heretics. The preachers are to blame. They turned the country over to fags; they're coming home in body bags. Charles G. Finney, Billy Sunday, Dwight Moody, Billy Graham ­ call the roll of all the so-called Great Evangelists. They were all Arminian to the core. They all hated Calvinists, and were passionately antiTULIP. Jimmy Swagart said the doctrines of Calvinism came straight out of Hell. The Southern Baptist report, ­ that 34% of recent seminary graduates identify themselves as Calvinists ­ also said, quote, "Churches pastored by Calvinists tend to have smaller attendance and typically baptize fewer persons each year." Bingo.  You tell people the truth: That all mankind are totally depraved ­ "T"; that only those whom God has unconditionally elected will be saved ­ "U"; that the atonement of Jesus Christ was limited to the Elect ­ "L"; that the call of God to salvation is irresistible, but is only for the Elect ­ "I"; that God's Elect will inevitably persevere unto final salvation in Heaven ­ "P".  There you have it: T-U-L-I-P. The five points of Calvinism. Preach that to people ­ in other words, preach the Gospel to people ­ and prepare for rejection, as in the days of Noah, just before the Flood. And prepare for mockery. Look carefully, and you will see a "Talking Fred Phelps Doll", advertised for sale on the anti-Calvinism piece. Three little girls are laughing, as the "Talking Fred Phelps Doll" repeats "5 Fun Phrases;" to wit: "You're going to hell!" "Sons of Belial," Perverted vile beasts," "Irreversibly damned," and, "God hates you!" INSTITUTIONALIZED MOCKING & SCOFFING "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days SCOFFERS, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming?" (2 Pet. 3:3,4) "But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; How that they told you there should be MOCKERS in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts." (Jude 17-18) And, of course, Satan must have his own Bible ­ a new translation or two ­ fags and dykes on the board of translators. Look carefully at the lower left below the "Talking Fred Doll." Can you believe it? Just look at that thing: "Today's New American International Revised Standard English Christian Contemporary Living King James Message Version." See how these Arminian idiots package their new "version" of God's Holy (mangled) word; to wit: "The TNAIRSECCLKJMV (t-nair-seckel-KJM-vee): Now the most complicated translation is more affordable. For the loved one in your life who must have (Satan's latest)." On any view of the matter, these two documents arriving at my desk rather simultaneously are signs of the times from our Father. Both are mocking and scoffing by Last Days of All Arminian heretics. Lots of time went into both documents. Our job? Clear as a bell; to wit: "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught." Titus 1:9. Amen.  
