Sunday, October 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  Upon one occasion, soon after his labors at preaching ministrations had achieved success and widespread attention throughout Judah and Jerusalem, Jeremiah suffered a reversal ­ a Satanic setback of sorts ­ at the hands of Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the Lord at that time; who without cause other than Jeremiah's preaching, arrested  Jeremiah, beat Jeremiah, threw Jeremiah in jail, and thereby defamed Jeremiah and set off a chain  of slander that gave his enemies ammunition for their many weapons of reproach against him. Beloved, there is much spiritual wisdom to be learned from this episode in Jeremiah's life. The  mighty David admitted that reproach had broken his heart; to wit:  "Hear me, O Lord; for thy lovingkindness is good; turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. And hide not thy face from thy servant; for I am in trouble; hear me speedily. Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it; deliver me because of mine enemies. Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor; mine adversaries are all before thee. REPROACH HATH BROKEN MY HEART; AND I AM FULL OF HEAVINESS; AND I LOOKED FOR SOME TO TAKE PITY, BUT THERE WAS NONE; AND FOR COMFORTERS, BUT I FOUND NONE." (Psa. 69:16-20)  The childhood chant to the effect that sticks and stones may break my bones but names can never harm me is ­ like most old wives' tales ­ a bucket of warm spit. Those perverts and slanderers of Jeremiah drove a strong, good man ­ a servant of God ­ to curse the day he was born and other such invectives; to wit:  "CURSED BE THE DAY WHEREIN I WAS BORN; let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; making him very glad. And let that man be as the cities which the Lord overthrew, and repented not; and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide; Because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb to be always great with me. Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?" (Jer. 20:14-18)  Beloved, the experience of Jeremiah that drove him to such passionate language is shared by all God's Elect, and we should examine that experience carefully. The general principle is articulated in many beautiful places in Scripture, and the one I think I like best is at Romans, chapter 8; to wit: "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (Bang!) As it is written, FOR THY SAKE WE ARE KILLED ALL THE DAY LONG; WE ARE ACCOUNTED AS SHEEP FOR THE SLAUGHTER. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." Rom. 8:35-39.  Beloved, this is one area where we can ­ objectively ­ get ahold of solid evidence ­ that our calling and election is sure (2 Pet. 1:10) ­ OR NOT. Do all men hate you? OR NOT? Does "every one of them...curse you?" OR NOT? How was it with Jeremiah? What saith the Lord Jesus Christ? Scripture is crystal clear on this vital subject; to wit: "WOE IS ME, MY MOTHER, (SAITH THE PROPHET JEREMIAH) THAT THOU HAST BORNE ME A MAN OF STRIFE AND A MAN OF CONTENTION TO THE WHOLE EARTH! I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury" ­ (i.e., there is no logical reason whatsoever for all men everywhere to curse me) ­ "YET EVERY ONE OF THEM DOTH CURSE ME." Jer. 15:10.  Sunday, October 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, without any question, this is deadly serious prognosticating from the blessed lips of our  dear Lord Jesus; to wit:  "And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. BUT BEWARE OF MEN; for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. AND THE BROTHER SHALL DELIVER UP THE BROTHER TO DEATH; AND THE FATHER THE CHILD; AND THE CHILDREN SHALL RISE UP AGAINST THEIR PARENTS, AND CAUSE THEM TO BE PUT TO DEATH. AND YE SHALL BE HATED OF ALL MEN FOR MY NAME'S SAKE ; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matt. 10:14-22)  Beloved. This is the heavenly lode star ­ (the brightest of all in the galaxy) ­ that guides the righteous navigators on their journey home to glory and God; to wit: AND YE SHALL BE HATED OF ALL MEN FOR MY NAME'S SAKE. It follows that all God's Elect ­ and only God's Elect ­ and all of God's Elect ­ are hated of all men for His name's sake. Are you hated of all men for the dear Lord Jesus's Name's sake? NO? Then how do you explain this verse?  consistent with your calling and election being sure? Especially in light of the final words of the verse; to wit: "BUT HE THAT ENDURETH TO THE END SHALL BE SAVED?" Matt. 10:22(b). And, more especially in consideration of our guarantee of complete and final victory over Satan our arch-enemy in such passages as the following; to wit: "And the God of peace shall bruise" ­ (bruise here is a translation of a word meaning to crush to smithereens, to shiver to tiny bits) ­ "shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen." Rom. 16:20.  "Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses. ... There shall not any man (or devil) be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. ... Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest." (Josh. 1:3,5,9)  "But he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that Wicked One (Satan) toucheth him not." (1 Jn. 5:18)  The thoroughness and completeness with which God's Elect triumph over Satan and his messengers on earth lies in the Roman word TRIUMPH itself; to wit: "Now thanks be unto God,  which always causeth us to TRIUMPH in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place." 2 Cor. 2:14. The Triumph in ancient Rome was a solemn  procession in which a victorious general entered the city in a chariot drawn by four horses. He  was preceded by the captives and spoils taken in war, was followed by his own troops, and after  passing in great pomp in state along the Via Sacra, ascended the Capitol to offer sacrifice splendid bulls and oxen with horns encased in gold in the temple of Jupiter. There was no greater honor that could be bestowed; and the Triumph was recognized as the summit of military glory, and was the cherished object of ambition to every Roman general. Do you begin to see, Beloved, why the great apostle selected the term Triumph when speaking of Heaven's greatest honors to be bestowed  upon his faithful servants?  Sunday, October 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  Here's more a propo; to wit: After any decisive battle had been won, or a province subdued by a  series of successful operations, the Roman Imperator forwarded to the senate a laurel-wreathed  despatch containing an account of his exploit. Beloved, something like that happens each time we who know our God are strong and do exploits. Heaven's Grand Imperator records the matter and  forwards it to Heaven's Great King for disposition.  "How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that cometh from God only?" (Jn. 5:44)  "Wherefore the Lord God of Israel saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever; but now the Lord saith, Be it far from me; FOR THEM THAT HONOR ME I WILL HONOR, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed." (1 Sam. 2:30)  Further, no Roman general could be honored with a Triumph unless at least 5,000 of the enemy should have been slain in a single battle; and furthermore, the war should have been prosecuted or the battle fought under the immediate auspices and in the province and presence of the general seeking the Triumph. In other words, no armchair generals invited; and nobody trading on other generals' blood and guts ­ only George Patton-types, with hands-on experience. And so it is, Beloved, with the Wars of the Lord and the Quarrel of the Covenant. Every soldier in the Army of the Lord does his own fighting; to wit:  "This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the prophesies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest WAR A GOOD WARFARE; Holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck." (1 Tim. 1:18,19)  "Thou, therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. THOU THEREFORE ENDURE HARDNESS (OR, HARDSHIP), AS A GOOD SOLDIER OFJESUS CHRIST. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier." (2 Tim. 2:1-4)  The Roman Triumph was a most glorious affair, and at the time the Roman Senate voted to allow one, the Senate also voted a vast sum (into the millions) to pay for it. Beloved, our own Triumph will be infinitely grander, and a hint of its grandeur may be found at 2nd Peter, chapter one; to wit:  "Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. FOR SO AN ENTRANCE SHALL BE MINISTERED UNTO YOU ABUNDANTLY INTO THE EVERLASTING KINGDOM OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST." (2 Pet. 1:10,11)  Indeed, Beloved, it seems to me that this glorious doctrine of the Triumphs of each of the Elect is "the PRESENT TRUTH" that the dying apostle was so mightily determined to "be established" before his death; to wit: "Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things," ­ (what things? why, our glorious Triumphs, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) ­ "though ye know them, and be established IN THE PRESENT TRUTH." 2 Pet. 1:12. Indeed, the elderly and dying apostle Peter seems to be urging his near-approaching death as a justification for here advancing such fervent argumentation in favor of glorious and eternal rewards and honors for the Elect Saints of God in Heaven; to wit:  "Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance; Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our  Sunday, October 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me. Moreover, I will endeavor that ye may be able  after my decease to have these things always in remembrance. For we have not  followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and  coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty."  (2 Pet. 1:13-16)  (Note: Only a total of less than 500 Roman Triumphs were celebrated in the 1,900-year history of  Rome, including one Triumph for Titus the Great, applauding and celebrating the bloody Sack of  Jerusalem in 71 AD, wherein God Almighty punished and virtually destroyed the Jews as a nation.  So horrific was the Sack of Jerusalem that Jewish blood ran in rivers through the streets for miles;  all pursuant to the cautionary warning of the Lord Jesus Christ to the women of Jerusalem on His way to the cross; to wit: "And there followed him a great company of people, and of women,  which also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of  Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children. For, behold, the  days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never  bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall  on us; and to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?" Lk. 23:27-31.)  The era fixed for the grand rewards (identified as being like unto glorious Roman Triumphs) to be bestowed upon God's Elect, is THE END OF THE WORLD; to wit: "Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us." Lk. 23:30. See, and compare to; to wit: "And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; FOR THE GREAT DAY OF HIS WRATH IS COME; AND WHO SHALL BE ABLE TO STAND?" (Rev. 6:15-17)  Beloved, we do not speak here of a 24-hour day, but of an era, a fixed period of time, wherein the millions of impenitent literally flee, seeking refuge in the inhospitable dens, holes, caves and rocks of the huge mountain ranges of earth ­ described and told and retold in the Scriptures and from the mouths of His holy prophets since the world began. Beloved, is not the time upon us? when an angry God is about to arise and shake terribly the earth? To wit: "And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?" (Isa. 2:19-22) "And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it (i.e., the Lamb, Rev. 6:16.), from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them." (Rev. 20:11) The wicked, like moles and bats, are rooted out of their dens and caves by God's Elect, who themselves once wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth ­ being destitute, afflicted, tormented ­ of whom the world was not worthy ­ but who now assist the Lamb in adjudicating men and angels.  I love you. Amen.  
