These notes I have gathered to explain the Significance of Shri Meher Babas Work during the tour through India this year 1939. Shri Meher Baba’s own statements, having the definite importance to be the subtle explanation of His workings in the planes mental and subtle, I here relate as they were given to me: 
"My child, you ask me what is the significance of my tour in India with the Western and Eastern group. Why do I react in general and in particular in the way I do operate here now? This is my answer: I have come to resurrect. I do react in reaction in the universe as the divine life that is the reaction power in all in any. I am the mind impersonal. I am the ‘I’ life divine to realize in All-One-All Life the Use perpetual in reaction. That is the preparation-reaction, I here now do operate in subtle way in mind in 'I' to fulfill the pure realized state infinite. To react in I as One, as I, I have descended. The scope of the new realization reaction I, here now, do realize in my own way. It is super­ficial and it is deep. It is superficial and deep at one time. I, conscious within in mind infinite, react in mind in finite order in conscience. To do this I am One-All-One 'I' as use of life infinite. I am Use. I am work. I am life. I am way. I do the reaction show of life infinite, in every design in mind in man, here now. 
His divine mind is making motion. It is like the wind that blows over the ocean: it creates waves bubbles, deep subterranean earthquakes. It reacts in the deep show of life in reaction infinite: and in the dual life of men in self expression. It is the divine wrath in life of mind infinite. It is stir in lust, anger, passion to submerge in life infinite the demon, the I individual selfish. 
Nothing is pain, nothing is life in reaction when life in mind in Spirit is the divine opposing force that in ‘I' in­finite is life unselfish—lifa 

AJMER MEMORIES 
impersonal, indivisible Love." 
Throughout this tour in India with Shri Meher Baba we who had the privilege to be in His perfect company have been benefitted in the un­common way that one could only design as infinite expansion, in conscious reaction of Him, doing the Divine Dispensation. We have wit­nessed the divine martyrdom of life. We have witnessed the expiation through life, of mind, body, spirit— bring forth the realization of the divine theme. We saw in this tour with the God-man the miracle of Iife that is fulfilment of life divine. 
It was reward to see the uncon­ditional courage win in those, one has to name the "brave" ones—the holy beggar, crawling, creeping, walking the unending strife along the roads of life crude, bad, good—and so real. It was reward to see these staunch warriors on the Path, endure their selfless show of humility, sharing with the poor in spirit and the destitute in life the same divine urge to maintain life: unable to be tempted by food, unless the hungry dog of the street is fed first. 
To see this humble martyr, resign in non-resistance to the crude show of life in opposition—for love of God—was true inspiration. 
Heroic courage of those who seek for Truth is the worthy co-operation that in this life of one like Shri Meher Baba is speeding the divine realization. 
Life unselfish was the life of Jesus. Real life of humility was the life of St. Francis. Mastery in Servitude is the life of Shri Meher Baba. To realize the divine life, these men of hard labour in Expiation throughout innumerable tests, have in self-use unselfish tried to imitate the life's example of their spiritual leaders whom they knew to be The One. Unselfish love, humility of mind, unselfish use of one's own efforts are the great virtues that create the positive result. It reforms man and bis character. It annihilates the selfish 
I. It forms the true lover of God. Love that longs for perfect union is mono-order in conscience that in them has driven in the divine urge for self-annihilation. With patience unending, with heroic self-sacrifice they endure the holy ordeal of life as it is. 

Real wonder to us was the young divine Lover of God, old timer on the Path who says: "I have muttered throughout all my life two words, God-Love. Today these words have become true." Saying this with eyes filled with tears of joy unfathomable, he looks up to Baba who is standing in the doorway waiting ready to give him the bath and the food—that has to reassure the way. 
Among these of the God-searching tribe, that day, came a crippled man, who had become crippled for having sat for years in the same position regardless to cold or heat or bodily discomfort. This one called out for food. While calling loud for the material need, he was beating his head against the stone wall, as if to do penance for his material want which for so many years in self-denial he had tried to win in with pure longing for Truth. Here he was, lying in front of the door of mercy. There stood the most merciful of all men—who exchanges free the impure desire—who says: "Come to Me all who are in need—good or bad. In Me is life immune." 
That day was Baba's 45th Birthday. 
Baba's gift to them was the bath of Compassion, and the material food, which handed by Him becomes symbol of Grace. 
He has come to bless them all. 
All who real and true long for the ultimate admittance in the divine heart; all who struggle free and unattached, for the divine fulfilment; who lend the warmth of their human heart in humble assistance to others —the ignorant ones—whether the rich or the poor; who owe the contageous state in rapture in benediction that is life in love emotion spiritual; who crawling about in dirt and in rags to signify no other desire than to give love. 
Shri Meher Baba's work is the divine dispensation as the living divine spark that in living is the realization of the Truth. He is the divine spark as love-motion in divine expansion, in pure rhythm. He is the Redeemer. He marks short-cut in Evolution in any, in the good and in the bad. He is Mercy. He is all-knowing. 
To us who still expiate in body in mind the state impersonal in reaction, Shri Meher Baba says: "Servitude 

in mind in selfless state in Being, is more than the physical act to react to all the pain as the physical order in creation. Why do men see that, and none but realize the pain in I? 
As us divine, I, in all, am the selfless serving one that is both hard, soft, real, false. I in all am less than the finite reaction in men is. I in mind in men am more than the ‘I' infinite is. I am All-in-One, the One-in-All expansion infinite that in all is self-use of Truth. To see in my own external work this, is to see the divine ‘I’ in use in all as help, as fact to react in self-use the I in use. For this I am the divine 'I' in use divine. To see life realize the divine expansion in spirit— I am the divine expansion in Being that is free, unattached, unconscious in use in I as duo-act as reaction I am the sure show of Truth that in all in any, is pure elevation. That I here now sow-in in all who in self-state in use impersonal do, and undo in Me— them in I. To do in them I, as the finite order in Expiation—I  am descended. 
To be the divine 'I' in use in One­in-I, in two-in-one—unself-active in reaction, is to bring-in in One in I as mind, body, spirit, the state of selfless experience. To see in this One-in-I, as divine conscious reaction in I, in finite reaction—is to see, to know, to find within, the state free. To live for Me, is to live for use of Me unselfish in all in I, as infinite as finite order in mind. 
That is the whole show of mind in 'I' infinite, I here now do stir. 
This is the explanation that in ‘I’ infinite is of use to all who in ‘I’ infinite show the reactionless state in reaction in the realm in spirit, To the average mind in finite reaction this is too impersonal as conception. To the average intuition, it is too impersonal. To the self-acting real good man in the path spiritual it is the divine Intui­tion in I as the 'I' impersonal, that in 'I' impersonal, is the divine life as self-guidance. When in mind in 'I' infinite the self-guidance is reactive, it is the divine 'I' impersonal in One­in-I as the portion in 'I' infinite, that in mind in acceptant reaction, is oper­ating as the divine self. When in I in 

life in the dual, the divine ‘I' as use infinite is descended, the self-use infinite in 'I', as the I in the duo-reaction in the infinite, as portion in life in I as Self, is the divine mind in expansion in self-reacting use, that in mind in the infinite is the use of Truth direct. That is to be new in I in the finite as reaction. It is new as it is, giving new the divine Impulse to seduce in I in the finite reaction, the divine impulse. To live in my One-in-I resigned, is to realize in the state unconscious, the divine show of I. See Me, it is 'I' in Me is Jesus. I am in all and in every human the Christ Power that has to realize the new awakening in spirit here now. I do it in a different time with a more developed mind as mental understanding; but in spirit, it is the sure show impersonal in mind in Being as spirit that I realize new. I demand obedience, no more penance. No more life in ritual in ceremony of religion, but of life real in practice of life of every day. I demand mankind to react as human divine Creature and no more as animal that is in the 'I' divine unconscious and obscure, as was the mind in 
man when Jesus, as I, was crucified. 
To crucify is to react in Me in pain. 
To say one is dead and no more alive, is to say to Me that I do no more exist in I in man. It is here that I win in mind in man. Here I win in all in mind in man. Here I do win, here in you, my human element in Creation. 
Here now, life is threatened by destruction, threatened by life material. Here now, in every corner is death doing Me pain. That is Crucifixion. I say this here now to all, here in this spot of peace, no more war, no more beatitude in rapture, but expression in life human ... I shall win in all the con­scious I, that in all is human; so the good man, the mad one, the real ascetic, all have to know Me as God, who is here to deliver to life an other conscious state impersonal that is Love. 
Love is the feast of life in rapture in every day's life. Love is rapture of joy in every Motion state impersonal. Love has to reconcile the nations, the relig­ious differences, the differences in race. 
I here in Ajmer find more life to rescue for Me, to work with, than in any place we 

were. We here know what is life divine. It is in men in all phases. It is here, there and non-anywhere, but there where love has marched in and in, and out in bare suffering. These people have been crucified for Love. We see that. We see it in everyone who here appears before Me; as in Non-resistance in Love is mind—real Love. In Non-resistance in Being, is life, real love. So see the saint, the little hungry begging soul, it is all­one-life in martyrdom in life that has given to Me this birthday gift. 
I see in these two men, whose life conscious I win in Being, that they were to Me sure to come. (Here Baba alludes to the Majzub on the sixth plane in consciousness, and to the second agent who is the conscious type on the path in the sixth plane.) I saw their lives linger in ardour of living joy and conscious expiate in love. The last step in them I shall beseech free. These I win in the divine 'I', as I win anyone of you. Here in Ajmer I am free to work, as here I feel life so strongly protected against the impure reaction of life in opposition. 
I here work unconditional and absolute and free." 
This year Baba spent His august birthday in working for them whose divine experience we have reacted in deep awe, sharing with them the almon supreme of His divine living Love. 
Later Baba speaks again about the two holy men. He says: "One of them is the advancing soul, as Majzub, on the sixth plane. A rare case. Such a man is still within. He is like a beautiful lake that is frozen. He is a beautiful life that has expiated, and ended the strife. He is at the desireless state when in mind one is calm. He has no real desire. Those who know the differences in fact of these planes in consciousness, know what is the mind in the state in stillness. You as layman know and see and feel. The man in the mind state, pure above the finite, is Calm. Both these Selves are free from birth and death. This is free life in Being in spirit that has attained the state in life in mind infinite, that is indivisible existence in mind in rapture in Light of Truth. No one is apt to go beyond this state without 

the personal help of God. The Truth is as high as this, to know Me in Light.” No-man’s state. Man has to adventure
