Sunday, July 12, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your  brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake,  said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and  they shall be ashamed. A voice of noise from the city, a voice from  the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence to his  enemies." Isa. 66:5,6. "Nevertheless the foundation of God  standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are  his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from  iniquity." 2 Tim. 2:19. "And it shall come to pass, that from one  new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all  flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall go  forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have  transgressed (or, rather, that are transgressing) against me; for  their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and  they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh." Isa. 66:23,24.  Thus ends "The vision (the lengthy vision) of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah." Isa. 1:1. It has been reckoned up by wiser men than I that Isaiah preached and prophesied some 72 years, through the lives of four outstanding kings of Judah. It is worthy of note that he appears to have ended his amazing career for the Lord with a vision of all the Elect of God, standing as it were on the banks of a horrendous Lake of Fire and Brimstone (i.e., HELL), wherein were all the STILL-TRANSGRESSING reprobates (i.e., all the Non-Elect). It seems that this fearsome scene of the suffering of the Damned is available for viewing throughout all eternity, and the effect of this viewing is to create in God's Elect a profound loathing ­ and that's the way the grand old book of Isaiah the Prophet ends; to wit: "And they shall be an ABHORRING unto all flesh." Isa. 66:24(b).  Think of it, Beloved. A great part of our activity as officials and servants of the King in the eternal Kingdom of God will be the management and control of these billions of impenitent transgressors. It is to these "nations" of peoples the risen Savior referred when he promised to give us power over the nations; to wit: "But that which ye have already hold fast till I come. And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations; And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers; even as I received of my Father. And I will give him the morning star. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches." (Rev. 2:25-29)  "And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule the nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne." (The man child is the aggregate of all God's Elect, whose inheritance and destiny appears to be managing and controlling and otherwise governing the billions of the Non-Elect as they continue to be eternally impenitent transgressors.) Rev. 12:5. And these Elect of God are therein at all times functioning directly under the Lamb, whom they follow and serve withersoever He goeth; and would seem to be the same with the armies in heaven, who follow Him upon white horses, clothed in shining white garments, engaging with Him as He smites the nations with the sword out of his mouth and rules them with a rod of iron and treads the winepress of the wrath of God; to wit:  Sunday, July 12, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." (Rev. 19:14-16)  It is the language of continuing and eternal governance, rather than isolated, sporadic, and shortlived incidents ­ even if violent and occasionally lengthy. Listen again to the closing language of Isaiah's vision, and ask yourself if a final, permanent and settled arrangement is not described; to wit: "And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they (i.e., all flesh) shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me" (i.e., the men that are transgressing against me); "for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, AND THEY SHALL BE AN ABHORRING UNTO ALL FLESH." Isa. 66:23,24.  The oft-used expression here, "And it shall come to pass," has a solemn, and at the same time a joyous finality to it. It speaks of transitioning from a state of constant war and turmoil to a state of final and complete victory, peace and everlasting rest; much as when there was a glorious transition from King David, a man of war and strife, to King Solomon, a man of peace and the wisdom of pacification in both internal and external affairs; to wit: "And Hiram king of Tyre (i.e., modern Lebanon) sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father; for Hiram was ever a lover of David. And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the Lord his God FOR THE WARS WHICH WERE ABOUT HIM ON EVERY SIDE, until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet. But now the Lord my God hath given me REST ON EVERY SIDE, SO THAT THERE IS NEITHER ADVERSARY NOR EVIL OCCURRENT... And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the Lord this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people." (1 Kgs. 5:1-7)  Beloved, we are living in the days of the church militant. There is war and strife on every side ­ with innumerable satanic and demon-possessed enemies, until the Lord shall put them under the soles of our feet, as with David. At which time we shall joyfully cry out as with Solomon, "But now the Lord my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent." 1 Kgs. 5:4.  Immediately after the final damnation of the teeming billions of the unsanctified seed of Adam is announced, as follows: "And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name" ­ Rev. 14:11 ­ I say, as soon as these glorious words ring throughout the universe, there follow these words of eternal comfort and rest; to wit: "Here is the patience of the saints; here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. And I heard the voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may REST from their labors; and their works do follow them." (Rev. 14:12,13)  Sunday, July 12, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  The picture held to our happy view by the last two verses of the book of Isaiah, is that of the run-  up to the final rest, tranquility, and joy unspeakable and full of glory of the saints in light; and, on  the other hand, the final, inescapable, and eternal misery and damnation of the wicked in Hell.  Gill: "We are not to imagine that new moons and Jewish sabbaths shall now be observed, which have been long abolished; to wit: `And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses; blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross; And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the NEW MOON, or of the SABBATH DAYS; which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ.' Col. 2:13-17. Here the times and seasons of Gospel worship are expressed in Old-Testament language; and the sense is, that the people of Christ and members of churches, in the latter days, shall constantly attend churchmeetings; shall assemble together EVERY MONTH to celebrate the LORD'S SUPPER; and every Lord's Day (Sunday), to hear the word, pray and sing praises together; hereby enjoying much spiritual peace and rest, and increasing in evangelical light, signified by the new moons and sabbaths; and when their light will be exceeding great and glorious." And so it is, Beloved, that these happy gatherings of the saints are absolutely essential to our holding fast the profession of our faith without wavering; to wit: "Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful that promised;) And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works; NOT FORSAKING THE ASSEMBLING OF OURSELVES TOGETHER, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching." (Heb. 10:23-25)  There is a strong inference from the positioning of verse 26, that a willful failure to thus "constantly attend these church meetings" may be fatal to holding fast to one's profession of faith; to wit: "For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." (Heb. 10:26,27)  These are the only true worshipers of God, and none but these are ALL the acceptable and authentic worshipers of God, and are here denominated "ALL FLESH," due to the heart-felt experience of each and every one of them; to wit: "And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an HEART OF FLESH; That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God." (It is the language of unvarying exclusivity deriving from sovereign and absolute predestination ­ i.e., distinguishing grace and mercy.) "But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations" (i.e., sodomites and their ilk), "I will recompense their way upon their own heads" (i.e., the lake of fire ­ `neither shall their fire be quenched,' verse 24) "saith the Lord God." Ezek. 11:18-21. "All flesh" means, simply, all God's Elect; to wit: "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give  Sunday, July 12, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart  out of your flesh, and I will give you an HEART OF FLESH. And I will put my spirit  within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my  judgments, and do them...Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your  doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your  iniquities and for your abominations." (Ezek. 36:25-27, 31)  "All flesh" simply means, "All God's Elect." And to me it is significant, that these two words are the LAST TWO WORDS of Isaiah's holy vision, which takes up 66 chapters. And not a sloppy agape word on Isaiah's holy horizon (!).  Beloved, examine those last two verses, and those last two words, and search for the central theme ­ just as it is so, of the entirety of Isaiah's vision. The majority of the words of the two verses ­ and certainly the very last words of the last verse ­ are about scathing Hell fire and brimstone upon the whole of the billions of the impenitent human race. Not a word about the socalled universal love of God toward everyone. Note, too, that the outraged wrath of God seems to be reflected in the last four words of the last verse; to wit: an "abhorring unto all flesh" ­ i.e., all of God's Elect, in God's Name ­ have an eternal holy hatred or an abhorring (a stronger word than hatred). And the severe punishments meted out by the Almighty upon the universe of all mankind are largely on account of their vicious persecutions of His Elect; to wit: "And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking (persecuting) of his sons, and of his daughters." (Dt. 32:19) "To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence ...For the Lord shall judge (avenge) his people." (Dt. 32:35,36) "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily." (Lk. 18:7,8) "Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed." (Isa. 66:6)  As the inmates of God's eternal prison will forever continue to transgress and blaspheme ­ God's Elect will be called upon to rule (govern) those nations of incarcerated beasts ­ with a rod of iron. See Rev. 16:10,11; and, Rev. 2:26-29; and, Rev. 3:21,22. The true worshipers of God, v. 23, to whom the carcasses of the wicked in Hell will be loathsome and abominable, greatly admire the justice of God in damning and punishing them; to wit: "When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day." (2 Thes. 1:10)  And their hearts swell with love, gratitude and praise, that, but for the sovereign grace of God and the sacrificial and discriminating love of the dear Lord Jesus, their part would also be in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, for ever and ever.  The Targum is, "and the ungodly shall be judged in Hell, till the righteous shall say concerning them, `We have seen enough.'" Or, as if one should say, "The wicked will get out of Hell when Hell freezes over." The Lord Jesus often quoted from this verse: Mk. 9:44. I love you. Amen.  
