Finding Beauty in the Dark: 
A Spark in the Midst of Hopelessness 
December 1, 2013 
Lane Campbell, Director of Religious Education 
 
 
Opening 

 
We are here 

 In out of the cold 
 On the anniversary of World AIDS day 
 Remembering the warmth of those we have lost 
 Gathered together as a community again to never for
get 
 Grateful for meals shared this past week 
 Remembering that not all can be as fortunate 
 Coming back together again from travels near and fa
r 
 To worship together here in this space, on this mor
ning 
 
 And so, bearing witness both to our world as it is,
 
and
 as Love can imagine it, 
we would claim that vision of a just world in our o
wn lives. And because of a 
growing sense of kinship with all beings, inviting 
our compassion, we begin in this 
celebration to engage our mission with our whole li
ves: body, mind, and heart. 
 
Praising:
 Hymn #1000 Morning Has Come 
Ingathering 

?Something From Nothing? by Phoebe Gilman 

When Joseph was a baby, his grandfather made him a 
wonderful blanket to keep him 
warm and cozy and to chase away bad dreams.  But as
 Joseph grew older, the wonderful 
blanket grew older too.   

One day his mother said to him, ?Joseph, look at yo
ur blanket.  It™s frazzled, it™s worn, 
it™s unsightly, it™s torn.  It™s time to throw it o
ut.?   
?Grandpa can fix it,? Joseph said.  

 Joseph™s grandfather took the blanket and turned i
t round and round.  ?Hmm,? he said as 
his scissors went snip, snip, snip and his needle f
lew in and out in and out, ?There™s just 
enough material here to make a wonderful jacket.? 

Joseph put on the wonderful jacket and went outside
 to play.  But as Joseph grew older, 
the wonderful jacket grew older too. 

One day his mother said to him, ?Joseph, look at yo
ur jacket.  It™s shrunken and small, 
doesn™t fit you at all.  It™s time to throw it out!
? 
?Grandpa can fix it,? Joseph said. 

Joseph™s grandfather took the jacket and turned it 
round and round.  ?Hmm,? he said as 
his scissors went snip, snip, snip and his needle f
lew in and out and in and out, ?There™s 
just enough material here to make a wonderful vest.
?   
Joseph wore the wonderful vest to school the very n
ext day.  But as Joseph grew older, 
the wonderful vest grew older too. 

One day his mother said to him, ?Joseph, look at yo
ur vest.  It™s spotted with glue and 
there™s paint on it too.  It™s time to throw it out
!? 
?Grandpa can fix it,? Joseph said. 

Joseph™s grandfather took the vest and turned it ro
und and round.  ?Hmm,? he said as his 
scissors went snip, snip, snip and his needle flew 
in and out and in and out, ?There™s just 
enough material here to make a wonderful tie.? 

Joseph wore the wonderful tie to his grandparents™ 
house every Friday.  But as Joseph 
grew older, his wonderful tie grew older too. 

One day his mother said to him, ?Joseph, look at yo
ur tie!  This big stain of soup makes 
the end of it droop.  It™s time to throw it out!? 

?Grandpa can fix it.? Joseph said. 

Joseph™s grandfather took the tie and turned it rou
nd and round.  ?Hmm,? he said as his 
scissors went snip, snip, snip and his needle flew 
in and out and in and out, ?There™s just 
enough material here to make a wonderful handkerchi
ef.?   
Joseph used the wonderful handkerchief to keep his 
pebble collection safe.  But as Joseph 
grew older, his wonderful handkerchief grew older t
oo. 
One day his mother said to him, ?Joseph, look at yo
ur handkerchief!  It™s been used til 
it™s tattered, it™s splotched and it™s splattered. 
 It™s time to THROW IT OUT!? 
?Grandpa can fix it,? Joseph said. 

Joseph™s grandfather took the tie and turned it rou
nd and round.  ?Hmm,? he said as his 
scissors went snip, snip, snip and his needle flew 
in and out and in and out, ?There™s just 
enough material here to make a wonderful button.? 

Joseph wore the wonderful button on his suspenders 
to hold his pants up. 

One day his mother said to him, ?Joseph, where is y
our button?? 
Joseph looked.  It was gone!  He searched everywher
e but he could not find it.  Joseph 
ran down to his grandfather™s house.  ?My button!  
My wonderful button is lost!? 
His mother ran after him, ?Joseph!  Listen to me.  
The button is gone, finished, kaput.  
Even your grandfather can™t make something from not
hing.? 
Joseph™s grandfather shook his head sadly.  ?I™m af
raid that your mother is right,? he 
said.  The next day Joseph went to school.  ?Hmm,? 
he said, as his pen went scritch 
scratch, scritch scratch, over the paper.  ?There™s
 just enough material here to make a 
wonderful story.? 

Greeting 

Affirming 

In unison: 

We gather in the chill of winter...finding warmth f
rom each other, nourishing hope where 
reason fails. Grateful for small miracles, we rejoi
ce in the wonder of light and darkness 
and the daring of hope. 

-Congregation Beth El, Sudbury, MA 

Singing
 #352 Find a Stillness v. 1 
Communing 

The cold, icy breeze touches your cheek at this fir
st sign of winter, as you exit one place 
or another.  So cold, it calls your attention, take
s your breath away.  It is that in-between 
time, when winter is not quite here yet, but fall h
as passed.  The snow crunches below our 
feet, we walk with dainty steps, avoiding the possi
bility of slipping and we know it will 
continue to become colder and colder.  We step insi
de to feel the warmth, to slow down 
our lives at this time of year.  We embrace the cha
nging pace of our days Œ the invitation 
to draw inward, to be at home, to be still for a wh
ile.  This is a time of year for hot 
beverages, lighting candles, keeping warm.  This is
 a time of year to slow down and 
reflect, to notice.  Let us take time now to embrac
e a moment of stillness, to allow that 
stillness to carry us for just a moment.  

Silence 

We look back over a week shared with family, with f
riends, with those we love and those 
we still choose to spend our holidays with.  We loo
k forward to a meal shared in 
gratitude, to the food prepared by loving hands, wa
rm faces.  We look back and we notice 
who was not at the table this year, whether they ha
ve been gone for a while, or whether 

they recently left.  We remember those who could no
t be there, as they were sick or 
healing or traveling elsewhere.  We allow the week 
to wash over us as we sit in our chairs 
here in this space.  This week, especially, we hold
 dear the names of those living with 
HIV/AIDS, and those gone from our days due to HIV/A
IDS. We remember names and 
faces of those who were on our hearts this past wee
k.  And we join now in speaking 
names, whether in the silence of our hearts, or alo
ud in this space. 
Naming 

As we have now listened to one another, let us list
en to this beautiful gift, woven in note 
and form.  Let us join now as we listen to our musi
cal offering. 
Reading 1 

?Hanukkah? by Rev. Kathleen McTigue 

Imagine yourself in the midst of the ancient story.
 You and your friends, the survivors of 
war and persecution, have finally come home from a 
hard-won victory, but it doesn™t feel 
like home... You all teeter on the edge of despair 
when you see the temple, the holy of 
holies, filthy and abused. Your arms ache at even t
he thought of what it takes to reclaim 
this space. In any case, what™s the use? The sacred
 oil is almost gone, so the consecrating 
lamp cannot be lit. 

Then, in the midst of the exhausted, grieving silen
ce, someone speaks. You hear the 
voice, small but firm, saying the only words that w
ill let you gather yourselves to go on: 
Light the lamp. Though the oil has run out, light t
he lamp anyway, and we™ll do what we 
can. 

On the wall next to my meditation altar there is a 
photo taken in the wake of the 
horrifying tsunami that struck Sri Lanka in 2004. T
he photo shows the ruins of a town 
flattened by the waters, nothing left but rubble, a
nd there in the midst of that devastation, 
a damaged statue of the Buddha has been set upright
, its carved face chipped but still 
beautiful and serene. It sits there like a beacon s
ending out the silent message: 
Life is still 
here. Begin again. 

–What were they doing, the people of Sri Lanka who 
set the statue amidst the rubble? 
They were lighting the lamps, even though they knew
 that their oil had run out. 
There will come a time for most of us when we™ve go
t to decide whether we™ll light our 
lamps, even when we™re sure there isn™t enough oil 
to keep them burning– There are 
other, smaller catastrophes: the long weariness of 
unemployment; sickness; bereavement; 
depression; or the other private disasters that mak
e us despair. 
In the face of these smaller floods and earthquakes
, we come back to sacred space. We 
light a candle, take a breath, and reconnect with t
he flow of a life infinitely larger than 

our little beating hearts Œ a life we are part of, 
no matter what, that calls us back, lifts us 
up, and sustains us. 

Light the lamp, though the oil has run out. Light t
he lamp, and we™ll do what we can. 
Reading 2 

?A Window of Hope? by Karen Hering 

A friend of mine who lived in Alaska while raising 
her two young sons once told me 
about the isolation she™d felt, familiar to so many
 stay-at-home parents. She described 
how her loneliness had deepened during the winter, 
when there was less and less sunlight 
every day. The expanding darkness, she said, became
 nearly unbearable. Finally the days 
got so short that she would watch the clock careful
ly, making sure she stood at her 
kitchen window to see the sun both rise and set in 
one brief viewing from that spot. I 
picture her waiting at that window each day for one
 fleeting but sure glimpse of the sun 
that she would carry with her through the next twen
ty-three hours of darkness. 
I have never lived in Alaska, but I can™t help but 
think of the times in my life when I have 
felt hope shrink from my days as steadily as the su
nlight disappears in winter. How 
important the smallest sliver of light or hope can 
be in times like that. How I will stand at 
any window I can find that offers even the briefest
 view Œ sometimes barely visible if I 
rise up on tiptoe to catch a glimpse on the horizon
. 
I imagine, although I have never asked my friend, t
hat other places and homes in Alaska 
might have had a slightly better or longer view of 
the sunlight on those winter days. And 
I imagine too what relief my friend might have felt
 had someone invited her to share their 
view. 

?Friends do things like this,? the Sufi poet Hafiz 
once said in a poem by that title. 
?Friends,? he said, ?tell which mat their house key
 is hidden under–. for you would not 
believe the extraordinary view of God from my bedro
om window.? 
During the many times I have lost sight of hope fro
m my window, I have felt grateful 
when friends have invited me to view it from theirs
... This is how we make it through the 
longest nights. This is how we open a wider window 
to hope. This is how we break the 
isolation that keeps us standing in the darkness al
l alone. 
Preaching 

?Finding Beauty in the Dark: A Spark in the Midst o
f Hopelessness? 
I am touched by the story shared in the reading we 
had this morning from Rev. Kathleen 
McTigue.  Each year, I am touched as we share the s
tory of Hanukkah.  The temple in 
Jerusalem is desecrated multiple times by men actin
g on behalf of an empire, a king who 
wants to build a statue of Zeus right in the middle
 of their most sacred temple.  A group 

of Jewish men set out to reclaim the temple and suc
ceed.  They return, with a little sacred 
oil for their lamps (just one flask), needing the o
il to last eight days and nights so they 
can rebuild and restore this sacred space, this pla
ce of worship, culture, and identity for 
the people of Jerusalem.  They light the lamp Œ the
y light the oil that they have, and they 
keep it lit for as long as they can, holding hope i
t will last.  And miraculously it does Œ 
they have all of the oil they need to last those ei
ght days and nights. 
Rev. McTigue draws an interesting parallel here bet
ween the people in the Hanukkah 
story and those who rebuilt a Buddhist statue in Sr
i Lanka, following a devastating 
tsunami, that left their country shaken and partial
ly destroyed. 
My mind is drawn to the way people must have felt a
t the beginning of such a horrible 
storm and at the end of a period of war and persecu
tion.  It is drawn to the difficult times 
the Jewish people in this story endured.  I conside
r the pain of seeing one™s own country 
destroyed Œ homes that people had lived in, lives l
ost.  Both are stories that talk about 
facing fear and pain before getting to the miracle 
at the end.    
I do not pretend to know such pain.  My church has 
never been destroyed by the 
oppressive forces of empire.  My country has never 
been ravaged by such storms, at least 
not in the places I have lived.  But this morning I
 am in touch with these parts of the 
Hanukkah story at this particular time of year beca
use of the mixed emotions that come 
with the holidays and with this weather. 

These are some dark times ahead. Literally, we will
 be experiencing more and more 
darkness as the winter continues to come. We heard 
this morning about the light being 
less in Alaska Œ about days where the light grows l
esser and lesser, days where you only 
see an hour of daylight total. It is important for 
me to be reminded of such places 
because, just with the littlest bit of snow a few d
ays ago, I wished deep down inside for a 
snow day Œ a day at home where I would not have to 
leave the house, where I could stay 
inside with a hot beverage, and just wait for it al
l to melt.  But, no such luck Œ things had 
to be done, and so I skipped my snow day.   

Mostly what I don™t like about being outdoors in th
e weather we had this past week is the 
discomfort of it.  My feet get cold and wet, the wi
nd blows my hair in my face.  I am not 
a fan of being uncomfortable.  It™s part of the hum
an condition, right?  None of us wants 
to be in pain, yet difficult things happen to us al
l.  A loved one gets sick, a relative dies, a 
storm comes.  No one wishes for these things to hap
pen, but they happen. 
I can empathize with those who may have seemed hope
less in this Hanukkah story Œ the 
folks who might have been some of the naysayers in 
this ancient telling.  At this point in 
the year, I can totally be that person who says, ?W
ell, there™s not enough oil Œ there just 
isn™t.  Look at this one flask Œ we know we need mo
re.?  Or maybe even the person who 
says, ?What is the point of going up against these 
strong forces from Egypt?  We know 
our numbers are lesser, we know they have the polit
ical power and even if we win, they 
will be after us for something else.?  It is no mis
take this morning that I was the voice of 
Joseph™s mother for our ingathering story.   

I am often speaking of smaller things, of the way t
hings have been done before, of trying 
that suggestion years ago and it didn™t work, of kn
owing I need way more cinnamon to 
successfully make this pie recipe work.  These thou
ght usually come in isolation Œ when 
no one else is around to tell me otherwise. Isolati
on is a dangerous place for many of us. 
It is the time when we cannot see past our own situ
ations. 
In those times, I may even be speaking of getting o
ut of the house on a chilly, snowy day. 
Do you know what happened that day?  I drove right 
up to the front of the church, parked 
my car, and headed in.  Along the entryway path jus
t outside of our front doors, I was 
confronted with a sight unfamiliar to my eyes Œ a s
now bug.  Made similarly to a snow 
person, but with limbs coming out of all three glob
es, with little antennae coming up out 
of its head, and an apple peel for its mouth.  I am
 not sure who made said snow bug, but I 
am extremely grateful to them.  In seeing this crea
ture, I was reminded of the many snow 
people I have made and witnessed throughout my life
, of the fun contained in the winter 
time.  I was reminded of the snow days I did not sp
end indoors, but when I risked it all in 
snow gear, stayed out playing in the snow, and marv
eled at the beauty of this coming 
time of year. 

See, each time I can get into that naysayer role, t
here is often someone there, or 
something there, to remind me that I am not alone i
n this Œ to share their window of hope 
with me.  As Karen Hering said in the reading this 
morning, ?During the many times I 
have lost sight of hope from my window, I have felt
 grateful when friends have invited 
me to view it from theirs.?  On those mornings when
 I would rather stay in, I have been 
ultimately grateful for the opportunity to get out,
 to gain perspective, to step outside of 
that part of me, if only for a brief moment. 

This is where church comes in.  This is where what 
we are doing here transforms lives 
and transforms each of us.  This is a place we can 
come to know we are not alone in our 
troubles.  This is a place we can come to explore w
hat binds us to each other, to connect.  
This is where we come to hear, ?Light the lamp. Tho
ugh the oil has run out, light the 
lamp anyway, and we™ll do what we can.? 

I have seen Unitarian Universalist churches save li
ves.  I have heard stories from youth 
who felt they did not belong anywhere else, who fel
t isolated from their community.  I 
have heard stories from adults, who felt lost Œ loo
king for a place to go, looking for 
connection to something greater than themselves. 

This denomination has saved my life, many times ove
r.  I have lived in cities all over this 
country, and in each one of them, I knew I had a Un
itarian Universalist church I could 
attend to be spiritually, intellectually, and often
 physically, fed.  Finding a place of 
acceptance, where you can be who you are and explor
e who you are becoming is a rarity.  
And it is available to all of us here. 

Now, I don™t want to paint too rosy a picture.  The
re are times when we fall short.  We 
fall short of offering a full welcome, even when we
 intend to offer one.  We fall short of 

connecting with others because we don™t know where 
to reach out, or whom to reach for.  
As a congregation we have agreements, and still we 
are not perfect about living into 
them. 

We still come here for a sense of belonging, for a 
sense of connectedness to one another.  
This is a place where it can be found.  I can™t tel
l you how many folks I have met who 
have said, ?I have always been a Unitarian Universa
list, I just didn™t know it.?  There is a 
sense of homecoming here, of finding a place in a c
ommunity where beliefs are share,d 
or where beliefs are just plain valued.  Each one o
f us wants to be seen for who we are, 
and valued for who we are.  In our highest aspirati
ons, church is such a place. 
Together, we can work towards things we could not d
o in isolation.  We can work for 
justice in our local area and in our world.  We can
 teach our children, bringing the gifts of 
many perspectives.  We can reach out to our broader
 Clintonville and Columbus 
communities in ways not yet imagined. The Midrash c
ommentary on Deuteronomy 
states, ?Separate reeds are weak and easily broken,
 but bound together, they are strong 
and hard to tear apart."  There is strength in comm
unity.  There is strength in our bonds 
together, just as there is strength for the people 
who came together to raise up a statue, 
who came together to burn their oil, and work to re
build their temple. 
Last Thursday, perhaps you joined with family or wi
th friends to share a meal.   Last 
Wednesday evening, perhaps you came together with f
amily or with friends to light 
candles and to celebrate.  What matters is that we 
are coming together.  We are coming 
together to remember, to be grateful for stories th
at took place many, many years ago that 
still draw us to one another, that remind us of wha
t is really important.   
This is where the hope lives.  The hope lives in ea
ch one of us when we reach out to 
someone else in our own difficult times.  The hope 
lives in times when we see another in 
pain and reach out to them. The hope lives in place
s where we can shed our feelings of 
isolation, of aloneness and reach out to another to
 say, ?Man, it™s been a rough week.?  
Or to say, ?I see you are having a hard time.?  Or 
to even say, ?Look at that beautiful 
snowfall outside.  Come share the view from my wind
ow.? 
We are entering into a season of hope alongside our
 Christian neighbors.  This Sunday 
marks Advent Sunday, the beginning of a time of ant
icipation for the birth of Jesus of 
Nazareth.  Whatever your own personal beliefs may b
e about this man or this tradition, 
each one of us could use a little extra hope at the
 beginning of this winter time.   
It is amazing to me that all of these holidays fall
 together Œ Hanukkah, Thanksgiving, 
World AIDS Day, and the beginning of Advent  Œ all 
in one week.  Perhaps there is 
meaning there.  Perhaps it is just calendar dates a
ll aligning.  What it means for many of 
us, across denominations and supposed dividing line
s, is that we can join together.  We 
can join together in memory for those that came bef
ore us.  And we can join to create a 
world of connection, of knowing we are not alone. 

This past Sunday, I attended our Soulful Sundown se
rvice here at the church.  If you 
haven™t been, I highly recommend checking it out.  
Towards the end of the service, we lit 
candles Œ sitting around a table Œ for things we we
re hopeful for.  What a beautiful 
practice to share.  I just sat back and marveled at
 this visual representation of all of the 
things we were hopeful for.  Let us join with those
 lighting candles of hope this season Œ 
candles to remember those who gave us hope, and can
dles for hopes newly born.  Let us 
join with one another in this season of anticipatio
n for what is coming, this time of 
remembering and celebrating. 

May you know you are not alone in those dark times.
  May you find connection here in 
this place.  May you remember all there is to be ho
peful for and may it carry you through 
this season. 

Offering 

In a spirit of generosity and gratitude, let us giv
e to the works of this growing and vibrant 
church.  Let us give to this place Œ a center for o
utreach and justice, a location for 
nourishment, where our passions come alive.  We inv
ite you this morning to give to the 
transformative work of learning, loving, and becomi
ng more fully who we are.  The 
offering will now be generously given and gratefull
y received. 
Returning 

With gratitude, we receive the gifts you have freel
y given.  Thank you. 
Let us join hearts and voices now in singing this s
ong of hope for this advent season.  A 
song of anticipation and rejoicing, of comfort in t
he midst of isolation.  Please open your 
hymnals to: 

Singing 
  #225 O Come, O Come, Emmanuel v. 1, 2, and 4 (Ple
ase rise in body or in 
spirit) 

Blessing 

 
