Sunday, May 22, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. ... I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord." Zeph. 3:8,12. "I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land." Joel 3:2. "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them unto the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon." Rev. 16:12-16.  This was also, probably, the infamous place also known as the Valley of Megiddo connected to the Plain of Jezreel, where good king Josiah was slain in his 39th year by Pharaoh Necho in a battle which Necho tried repeatedly to avoid. I love Josiah, and I believe all God's Elect love Josiah; who brake down the houses of the sodomites which were in the house of the Lord where women wove partitioning privacy curtains for the filthy fag idol, Priapus. 2 Kgs. 23:7. It was foolish on the surface of things, and simply inexplicable, why Josiah picked that fight with Necho and got himself killed; to wit: ("After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates; and Josiah went out against him. But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war; for God commanded me to make haste; forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he destroy thee not. Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, AND CAME TO FIGHT IN THE VALLEY OF MEGIDDO. And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded. His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; and all the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel; and, behold, they are written in the lamentations. Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according to that which was written in the law of the Lord, And his deeds, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah." 2 Chron. 35:20-27.)  I tell you, Beloved, I feel like joining the mourning and lamenting crowds at the burial and funeral of good king Josiah. Of no other king was it ever recorded that he brake down the houses of the sodomites in the House of the Lord. This tells me that unless one openly, and notoriously, and intelligently, and zealously, and uncompromisingly, opposes sodomy and sodomites ­ in all their forms ­ one is not likely to hear words of glowing praise such as those uttered of Josiah; to wit: "And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him." (2 Kgs. 23:25)  Sunday, May 22, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  Thus, Beloved. The historical fact that good king Josiah, in the first clash of the battle with Necho, received his mortal wound and died, is enough to sanctify the Valley of Megiddo forever. And if the final Battle of Armageddon of Revelation 16 is symbolic, then geographical exactness is unimportant ­ though interesting. The "waters of Megiddo" (Jdgs. 5:19) and the "valley-plain of Megiddo" (2 Chron. 35:22) have witnessed important battles throughout history, from one fought by Pharaoh Tuthmosis III in 1468 BC, to that of British Lord Allenby of Megiddo in 1917 AD. And, do not forget the glorious victory of the people of God over Sisera and his hordes of Canaanites; where "the stars in their courses fought against Sisera" (Jdgs. 5:20); thereby inspiring the beautiful and triumphant Song of Deborah; to wit:  "Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying, Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves. ...and out of Zebulun THEY THAT HANDLE THE PEN OF THE WRITERS. ...And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak; HE WAS SENT ON FOOT INTO THE VALLEY (where he faced 900 state-of-the-art Sherman tanks - chariots of iron - and myriads of battlehardened troops). For the divisions of Reuben there were GREAT THOUGHTS OF HEART. ... For the divisions of Reuben there were GREAT SEARCHINGS OF HEART. ... Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that JEOPARDED (i.e., HAZARDED) THEIR LIVES UNTO THE DEATH IN THE HIGH PLACES OF THE FIELD. The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach BY THE WATERS OF MEGIDDO; they took no gain of money. They fought from heaven. THE STARS IN THEIR COURSES FOUGHT AGAINST SISERA. The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength." Jdgs. 5:1-21. Beloved. Somehow, one miracle after another was being wrought ­ through the prayers and supplications, through the advice and directions, of Deborah ­ strong, great, & mighty Canaanite armies were totally routed and destroyed. The stars in their courses fighting against the Canaanites, they were also drowning in the swollen river Kishon (i.e., "meandering in loops"); the Jewish writers calling it another miracle, "somewhat similar to that at the Red sea."  All of which occurred in the Valley of Megiddo; and all of which adumbrates the final battle of Armageddon; to wit: "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared. (The kings of the east might include China, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Russia, etc. ­ probably more than half the world's population.) And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the BATTLE OF THAT GREAT DAY OF GOD ALMIGHTY. Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon." See, Rev. 16:12-16.  Beloved. We are in the midst of the holy doctrines of last things; to wit: ESCHATOLOGY. A special blessing is thereupon and therefore promised unto us; to wit:  "The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John; Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw. BLESSED IS HE THAT READETH, AND THEY THAT HEAR THE WORDS OF THIS PROPHECY, AND KEEP THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE WRITTEN THEREIN; FOR THE TIME IS AT HAND." (Rev. 1:1-3)  Sunday, May 22, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  Now I put it to you, Beloved. At the outset of the book we are told by the Holy Ghost that this is THE UNVEILING OF JESUS CHRIST, and that we will be blessed of God if we read this Book, and/or hear this Book read to us, in our own mother tongue, and if we keep those things which are written therein (i.e., keep those things near and dear to us constantly in our minds and hearts). Now, as I say, I put it to you, Beloved; would our Father make such glowing promises to us to encourage us to spend quality time, as they say, in this blessed Book of the Revelation, and then make it well nigh impossible for us to understand? Indeed, make it impossible for ANY rational, sincere, kindhearted, good-hearted soul to understand? I think not. Or rather, is this not the kind of situation addressed squarely by the Lord God at Deut. 29:29? To wit: "The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law." (Deut. 29:29) "O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" (Rom. 11:33) And, among the last words of the dying apostle Peter was a caution that some apostolic writings, even, are "hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness." 2 Pet. 3:16,17. Some truths rise like mountain peaks; and, the Battle of Armageddon is one of those truths. Both sacred and secular truths.  The Euphrates is, in fact, drying up, as The New York Times recently reported in a welldocumented piece. Last year ­ from this pulpit ­ I preached on the subject of the drying up of the great river Euphrates; and things have only gotten worse since then. For mile after mile great sections of the once-mighty Euphrates river have already dried up, leading one to the logical question: Has the sixth angel already poured out his vial filled with the wrath of God? To wit: "And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; FOR IN THEM IS FILLED UP THE WRATH OF GOD." (Rev. 15:1) "And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth." (Rev. 16:1) "AND THE SIXTH ANGEL POURED OUT HIS VIAL UPON THE GREAT RIVER EUPHRATES; AND THE WATER THEREOF WAS DRIED UP, THAT THE WAY OF THE KINGS OF THE EAST MIGHT BE PREPARED." (Rev. 16:12)  The purpose of drying up the river Euphrates had something to do with destroying the military capability of the rebel nations of all the world. And, to this end, dimwits Hillary Clinton and Barak Obama are croaking and hopping all around in the swamps of the East and the Middle East, aiming immediately to enlist and orchestrate the mighty nations of those regions to march on Jerusalem, to their doom. See, Rev. 16:16; to wit: "And he (i.e., ,,God Almighty) gathered them together" ­ (i.e., by causing them to yield their wills to the unclean spirits even the spirits of devils, whose miracle-workings primarily consisted of persuading the fool kings of the whole world to vainly believe that they could wage successful battles and mechanized warfare against the great God Almighty) ­ "And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon." Rev. 16:16.  Beloved. Shortly now, on any view of the matter, all of these things must soon come to pass; and those things that are now prophesy, will have become history. Beloved. Do we not have abundant cause to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory? 1 Pet. 1:8.  Sunday, May 22, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Because I will publish the name of the Lord; ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment; a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children (i.e., His Elect); they are a perverse and crooked generation (i.e., the non-Elect)." (Deut. 32:3-5)  We have seen throughout Holy Scripture that the proliferation of sodomites in any society, harbingers (signals) the doom of that society ­ (e.g., the Antediluvian world, the 7 Nations of the Canaanites, Noah, Lot, Gibeah, Jerusalem, Rome, etc.). We recently received word from Australia, corroborating Scripture on this point; to wit: "The Westboro Baptists may be on the right track after all. With several states ratifying gay marriage and movements afoot to extend it elsewhere, it could become general. The Babylonian Talmud reveals that until now only one society in all of history practiced it, the Antediluvian. The Babylonian Talmud also says the practice was the reason for Noah's flood. The risk of retribution is real. We in Australia have just had our first such wedding (i.e., same-sex so-called wedding, he means). It's a worry. Ken Hood, Clifton, Australia."  Comes now the unsolicited kindness of another extra-Biblical authority named Michael W. Johnson, who was a captain in the U.S. Army Military Intelligence. He was also a Senior Middle East Analyst and Iran/Iraq Desk Officer for Forces Command Intelligence Center (FORSIC). He was a Tactical Intelligence Staff Officer and the recipient of two Bronze Stars. He is an International Relations Specialist holding many scores of copyrights. Additional information may be found in Who's Who in the World. He is what I would classify generally as a military analyst, who studies hours on end, searching through all available information, seeking for the factors that caused past wars and battles and violent upheavals of society, so as to intelligently prepare for and/or thwart future wars and strife. Dr. Johnson said, for example; to wit: "Throughout the 20th Century, THE RISE AND SPREAD OF HOMOSEXUALITY HAS BEEN A KEY FACTOR FOR MILITARY ANALYSTS SEEKING TO DETERMINE IF THERE WILL BE ANOTHER WORLD WAR, OR EVEN A CIVIL WAR, OR MAJOR REVOLUTION." The military analysts have a code for such procedure ­ called IOH ("Indicators of Hostility").  For example, Dr. Johnson writes: "There are many IOH factors numbering at least a dozen which point to WW III and the American Civil War II. Of these, THE BEST IS EVIDENCE OF HOMOSEXUALITY. It remains the position of this letter that AMERICA IS HEADED TOWARD THESE TWO CALLAMITOUS EVENTS. It is evident that the hedonistic" ­ (i.e., pleasure-seeker) ­ "It is evident that the hedonistic homosexuals have not learned the lessons of history. Consequently, it is virtually certain that they will be doomed to repeat them."  Thus you see, Beloved, this graduate of West Point, U. Sou. Cal. Mas. in Intl. Relations, Mass. Ins. of Tech. Doc. Pol. Sci., Harvard, etc. ­ agrees with WBC: proliferation of sodomites harbingers doom. THIS HOUR.  I love you.  Amen.  
