Sunday, September 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and THE BOOKS were opened: AND ANOTHER BOOK WAS OPENED, WHICH IS THE BOOK OF LIFE: and the dead were judged out of those things which were WRITTEN IN THE BOOKS, according to their works." Rev. 20:12.  Call this sermon something like, "The Books of God." And then, become better acquainted with the figure of speech known as an Anthropopathy, or sometimes called by a slightly different name, Anthropopatheia; and which means, attributing human feelings and needs to God. E.g., Thomas Brooks said, "The holy God, BY AN ANTHROPOPATHEIA, speaks to our capacity; for he doth all things without the help of books. God neither needeth nor useth books to judge by, but this is spoken after the manner of men."  Take the case of Esther and her uncle Mordecai, when the evil Haman had determined to hang Mordecai, but needed the king's permission. Then one night God gave the king a bad case of insomnia ­ he couldn't sleep; to wit: "On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring the BOOK OF RECORDS of the chronicles (of the mighty Persian Empire); and they were read before the king. And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus. And the king said, What honor and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this? Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, There is nothing done for him. And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into the outward court of the king's house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him. And the king's servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in the court. And the king said, Let him come in. So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honor? Now Haman thought in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honor more than to myself?" Esther 6:1-6.  And you know the rest of the amazing story of God's wonderful Providence; how Mordecai ended up next to the throne; Haman ended up on the same gallows he had prepared for Mordecai; and God miraculously delivered His people. To refresh your memory, you can read all about it in Esther, chapters six through ten, and see how it ended; to wit:  "And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of the sea. And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, are they not WRITTEN IN THE BOOK of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia? For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed." (Esther 10:1-3)  Sunday, September 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  And so you have here a wondrous example of how vitally important it was for mighty kings and empires to keep careful written records of significant events; to wit: "Are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?" Esther 10:2. Tamerlane had always by him a catalogue of his best servants and their patriotic deeds, which he daily perused.  God is said to have books, which shall be opened on the Judgment Day, at which time the dead shall be "judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works," (Rev. 20:12) all of which are recorded therein, in infinite detail ­ unlike faulty and deficient human histories, diaries, biographies, and books of account. But God is said to have books ONLY METAPHORICALLY, AND ONLY BY AN ANTHROPOPATHEIA; because the Great God of eternity needs no books to help His memory, which is infinitely accurate and complete; and, which is instantly and specifically recallable (i.e., God needs no Google or other search engine); He does all things by His infinite wisdom, foreknowledge, counsel, government and judgment. But this eternal and infinite ability, mankind does not possess; for whatsoever is done in their councils, cities, families, contracts, etc., for memory's sake, is set down in writing, that so, as there is occasion, they may look it over, and, hopefully, call to mind such things as they desire. Unless, of course, a fire, or a hurricane, or a tornado, or a flood, or an earthquake, or some other natural or manmade disaster does not come along and completely destroy all of mankind's books.  Beloved. Call the roll of the ancient empires. Where are their books? Where are the books of ancient Persia? that once were so vitally important! Not an extant leaf of a single book. Not a page remaining for us to read today. For that matter, Where is ancient Persia? And, WHO CARES? Well, one day, soon, our text indicates that all mankind shall care ­ desperately care ! to wit: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God." Rev. 20:12. I.e., all the dead from Adam to the last day shall be brought to judgment before the dear Lord Jesus, who alone has the keys of Hell and death in His hands, Rev. 1:18; Acts 17:30,31:  "Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead." (Acts 17:31)  This is the Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and the Branch growing out of His Roots. He had no need of books to render each and every final judgment upon each and every individual of mankind ­ from Adam to the last day. He will eschew to take evidence from the vast throng of criminals and lying reprobates standing trembling before Him; to wit: "And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and HE SHALL NOT JUDGE AFTER THE SIGHT OF HIS EYES, NEITHER REPROVE AFTER THE HEARING OF HIS EARS (the usual method of taking evidence at a trial)." Isa. 11:2,3. I.e., our Lord Jesus Christ ­ as final Judge of all ­ cannot be deceived or misled by the clever mass of lying humanity gathered before Him; because:  Sunday, September 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." (Heb. 4:13)  Don't you love it? Our Lord Jesus Christ is simply not interested in taking a lot of sworn testimony from a gang of cut-throats and liars. He is the omniscient God. He knows all that there is to know ­ inside and outside ­ about these billions of creeps now standing before Him for judgment; to wit: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God," (Rev. 20:12) that is, brought to judgment. Brooks said: "The guilty standing ready to be condemned, and the saints standing ready in Christ's presence to be absolved and pronounced blessed."  Beloved, this is the General Judgment we are talking about. It will be a most stupendous event, involving every individual of mankind who has ever lived. They are described in this text by age and condition, for the words may be understood of both "great and small," which takes in all sorts of people: tyrants, emperors, kings, princes, dukes, lords, presidents, judges, governors; as well as subjects, vassals, slaves, beggars, welfare recipients; rich and poor, strong and weak, bond and free, old and young. All and every one, without exception, ­ from Adam to the last soul born on earth ­ are to be judged; for the judgment shall be universal. None shall be so great as to escape this General Judgment; and none so small as to be excluded. But every one shall have justice done unto him, and without respect of persons; to wit: "For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ (aka, the Great White Throne, et al., as in our text, Rev. 20:11); that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men." (2 Cor. 5:10,11) Now, Beloved, lest any of the tender-hearted sheep and lambs of Christ be disturbed by 2 Cor. 5:10,11 ­ (or by any of the other nine or ten passages of Scripture, of similar import; to wit: Eccles. 11:9, and 12:14; Mat. 18:23; Lk. 16:2; Rom. 14:10; Heb. 9:27, and 13:17; 1 Pet. 4:5; Dan. 9:24; Col. 2:14.) ­ I say, lest any of God's dear Elect people be disturbed in mind by these verses, or by certain false preachers' MAL-INTERPRETATION of any of these verses, as by suggesting that God's eternally-Elect people might have to stand before God to be judged in any way, at any time, and answer for their sins, or their works, or for anything else ­ I will undertake, most humbly and in utter dependence on the dear Lord Jesus ­ to expound those Scriptures and expose that false doctrine.  Look again at the beautiful sentence of Thomas Brooks; to wit: "`And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God,' that is, brought to judgment. THE GUILTY STANDING READY TO BE CONDEMNED, AND THE SAINTS STANDING READY IN CHRIST'S PRESENCE TO BE ABSOLVED AND PRONOUNCED BLESSED." Yes, Beloved, we shall indeed be present on the great General Judgment day, as will every other individual of mankind who ever lived, from Adam to the last day ­ but for quite a different reason, and in quite a different frame of mind.  Sunday, September 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  We are there not to be judged for our sins, but to be rewarded for our many works of righteousness which is the imputed righteousness of Christ, and our works which were actually the works of our Lord Jesus Christ, "For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." Phil. 3:13. We are there not to be put on display before the assembled intelligences of the universe so that they might witness the formal announcement of the final and irreversible curses of Almighty God upon us for our sins, as are the impenitent wicked; to wit:  "Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, YE CURSED, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels...And these shall go away into everlasting punishment." (Mat. 25:41,46)  But how differently will it be for us, although we are also said to be standing before God, it is not to be judged for our sins ­ just the opposite. Listen. From his beautiful White Throne (here called the throne of His Glory, Mat. 25:31), our amiable and altogether glorious Savior shall smile upon us fondly, and announce loudly so that the throng going back into deep space may hear the honors heaped upon us, His sheep, to wit:  "Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye BLESSED of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world...[And] the righteous [shall go away] into life eternal." (Mat. 25:34,46)  Uncontrollable anguish, howling, weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and unearthly cries, are coming from the Savior's left hand where the hopelessly damned are gathered. In stark contrast, only delighted sounds of joy unspeakable and full of glory (1 Pet. 1:8) come from the smaller ranks of the now-glorified saints gathered at their beloved Savior's precious right hand. As I say, Beloved, we will be standing before the King on the great Judgment Day ­ as will the damned, for "We must ALL appear" (2 Cor. 5:10) ­ but for quite different reasons, and with quite different attitudes of mind. It is a time for great rejoicing for the saints.  In fact, some say that these dear ones (exceedingly dear to Christ, seated yonder on His throne) ­ I say, that some expositors say that these dear ones receive a special angelic escort, ordered up by the King, much like the pattern of King Ahasuerus in his rewarding of Mordecai; to wit:  "So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honor? ...And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delighteth to honor, Let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head: And let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth to honor, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honor. Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and  Sunday, September 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  take the apparel and the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to  Mordecai the Jew, that sitteth at the king's gate: let nothing fail of all that  thou hast spoken. Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and  arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback through the street of the  city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom  the king delighteth to honor." (Esther 6:6-11)  Now I put it to you, Beloved. Was that story, that the Holy Spirit put in the Bible, just an interesting bit of reliable ancient history, or was it a pattern of things to come on the Great Day of Judgment for how the righteous are to be escorted by angelic escort to the Great Judgment Hall, there to be heaped with honors by King Jesus? Because these are they "whom the king delighteth to honor." Certain it is that the angels are dispatched to gather His Elect together for some reason, about the same time as the Great White Throne Judgment; to wit:  "And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And HE SHALL SEND HIS ANGELS with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." (Mat. 24:30,31)  Furthermore, in the midst of all their sufferings for the cause of Christ while on earth, the elect were often encouraged and cheered by the specific promise of our Lord Jesus Christ that would seem to have its primary fulfillment at this Great White Throne Judgment Seat of Christ; to wit: "Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men (and did automatically suffer the fiery trials of persecution therefore, 1 Pet. 4:12), HIM WILL I CONFESS ALSO BEFORE MY FATHER which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men (and did thereby escape persecution for the cause of God and truth in the earth), HIM WILL I ALSO DENY BEFORE MY FATHER which is in heaven." Mat. 10:32,33.  Beloved, does not the very thought of what it might entail to have the Great King on the throne of his glory (Mat. 25:31) look lovingly upon you as He calls your name, and then "CONFESSES" YOU before His Father, as the assembled throngs of doomed, Christ -rejecting Persecutors, blood-washed fellow saints, and an innumerable company of angels ­ all look on as witnesses. I say, Beloved, have you never entertained the thought, as to what it might entail for Christ to CONFESS YOU, under those happy circumstances? Do not the words of another, (and infinitely inferior), king, Ahasuerus, King of the Medes and Persians, come to mind?; to wit: "What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honor?" Esther 6:6.  Then shall begin to cascade down around our heads the joyous fulfillment of those exceeding great and precious promises by which we were made partakers of the divine nature, and by which we escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust (2 Pet. 1:4), and by which we were enabled to overcome and to sit down with Christ on His throne, even as He overcame and sat down with the Father on His throne. Rev. 3:21.  Sunday, September 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  Among those exceeding great and precious promises by which hope was kindled and set ablaze was this:  "Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: BUT HE SHALL APPEAR TO YOUR JOY, and they shall be ashamed." (Isa. 66:5)  Beloved, it is at this Great White Throne Judgment, where all the books are opened, so that all these matters of eternal pain and misery of the damned, and eternal joy unspeakable and full of glory for the elect, are to be fully litigated; to wit: "And I saw a GREAT WHITE THRONE, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them (they can run, but they can't hide). And I saw the dead, small and great (every individual of mankind from Adam to the last day), stand before God; and THE BOOKS were opened (anthropopatheia, God needs no books, as all things about all mankind are stored [as it were] in His unfathomable mind of an infinite capacity to store and recall all things)." Rev. 20:11,12(a).  E.g., "Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever (that this people on My Left Hand are forever cursed and damned)." Isa. 30:8 and Mat. 25:41 ("Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.") Unto each individual standing on His Right Hand before the GREAT WHITE THRONE, the King shall say:  "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: ENTER THOU INTO THE JOY (i.e., UNSPEAKABLE AND FULL OF GLORY) OF THY LORD." (Mat. 25:21)  And now, Beloved, it may be comforting to read 2 Cor. 5:10 and the other nine or ten passages that may be troublesome ­ referred to above ­ in light of this sermon. Nothing is more plainly revealed in Scripture than that none of God's dear ones ­ His elect people ­ will ever have to stand trial before Him for their sins. This is proven by many hundreds of Scripture passages, one of which is Psalm 103; to wit:  "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: Who forgiveth all thine iniquities...He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust...But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him." (Psa. 103)  Amen.  
