



Shri Meher Babaís Tour 

OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA* 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 

The 27th of Decem ber. The s econd day's performance begins with the usual duties. Washing of the m ad-child. Answering of the mail. Interviews. Tea in the afternoon at the poetess ' home. Open darshana in the evening and concert. 

    A peculiar incident happens during the hours of the m orning. A woman, speaking broken English, looking the real type of the Indian soil, walks up to me. She tells m e this m ost extraor≠dinary story I here repeat in the same naive style it was told to me. 

    This child of nature, crude in  'I' but real in Being, all her life has been seeking for God. She had a daughter who, impatient to see God, committed suicide. Before dying she gave her mother the solemn promise that she would send down God to her... Adorable fool, sweet ignorant child! No doubt her unconscious act God has forgivenóno one dies for Him in vain! This wonderful wom an whose truthful story I took into m y heart, led by the spirit of her visionary daughter, com es to Nagpur where she finds the God. All 


day I saw her standing as close as she could to where Baba was, silently taking in the sweetness of His presence. Her own sister, a sim ilar type, solid, staunch, peasant-like wom an with a heart of gold, arrive s in the afternoon. She asks to m eet me; no doubt she wants to convey to Baba that she believes He is the right One. She said: "I have recognized Him . He is the Avatar. I do not need to ask Hi m any questions. I do not need to touch Him. I hear His V oice. I s ee Him within m y heart."

    In the afternoon we are expected at the home of D.., the young poetess. Baba is received in a beautiful clean bright room which serves also as a bedroom. Her own bed was prepared like a throne for Baba to sit upon. O ver the immaculate white em broidered bedspread she had placed flowers and fruits. At the end of the bed stood a small table which had been m ade into an altar at Baba 's feet, and on it are the shiny silver vessels tha t serve f or the ceremonyóa candle is burning dim and sweet and incense forms  a blue spiral around Baba 's feet.  After th ese holy offerings Baba asks her to read som e of her poems. She reads with a loud voice and with the authority of a strong personality which af firms itself in art. She becomes a different wom an. Baba greatly admires the depth and beauty of her thought. W ith unexpected simp≠licity which was prompted f rom the sincerity of her spiritual longing, she implores Baba that He would reveal to her Divine Love. The solem nity of her request creates a m oment of suspense. ...Baba, taking her arm s into His, gives the promise. Present at this initiation, performed in a hum an free manner, are all of us who form Baba 's party. 

Baba leaves, and with Him , in His car, are B.. and J. K., Baba 's brother Jal and myself. B.. drives in serpentines on perfectly paved asphalt roads, betw een lovely gardens, bungalows with Eastern facades, palaces for th e official o rdi≠nances and so forth. We see many elegant and good looking wom en wearing bright coloured saris, pro≠menading babies in go -carts of English make through the neat ly planted public gardens. 



We drive out of town, pass the beautiful summer swi mming-pool, no doubt a club for the fashionable world. At this m oment, Baba, who so often uses humour to attenuate outwardly the inner shock of His word in Truth, turns abruptly to J. B. w ho is sitting at His feet, "Do you swi m?" "Yes," he answers. "Well," con tinues Baba, "one day you will swim in the infinite ocean of LoveóI am the Ocean of Love. "

    Later on, passing by the house of one of the foreign m agnates, Baba again remarks: "Lust wants possessions. Love gives possessions." 

We return hom e to find new people standing, waiting in rows. Baba retires to His roo m for a few m oments. The police are at the gate to m ake clear the way. The doors have to be kept shut to hold back the people who had been untiring in waiting during the after≠noon. Special precau tions are taken to prevent the overflow from breaking in. B..'s son and a few of the devotees have to form a chain with their strong arm s to give free passage to a few to enter at one time. 

    It is 7-30 p. m . The hall is already packed when Baba walks in to take His seat on the beautiful couch richly de≠corated with pillows, shawls, car pets, representing the donations of the day. The feast of Love is in full swing. The music begins to storm: the Indian music is like natu re, it swing s, it thrills in forms of all rhythms; it is a bird song; it is the human sigh, the exode of the soul; it contains the echo of life itself.

 A remarkable individual suddenly enters the r oom, drawing the atten tion of the entire audience. Huge in stature, young, powerful in appearance, loud in manners, this m an seems to be well-known, as m any cheer at his com ing. When he laughs his m outh opens like a huge crevice in crude dark earth. But visible in his expression is the inner divine child that m akes his eyes glow with joy unfathomable. " Who is he?" we were bound to ask. Som eone whis≠pers, "He is a sa int. " With the unself ≠conscious attitude of a child, he pla ces himself at Baba's feet. He does not ask for Baba 's darshana, but, unconven≠tional and free, releases with loud voice sentences that must have been prom pted from within, swinging in subtler rhythm . Baba, who was working, doing, form ing, acting, unendingly bending in Mercy over the perpetual streaming flow of huma nity who came to call for the Divine Gift, knew this ' passer-by'. He indulges his presence for a short while, giving hi m time and s pace to react in his o wn individual way to the ' Truth-shock' that unconditionally had to strike this personality, too, who was hailed as a saint, but whom Baba knew to be o nly midway. ...At a due moment Baba makes him feel that he should change his place and sit at the other end of the hal1. The m an responds instantan≠eously, and withdraws, taking his seat near the orchestra. The breeze of Love that Baba arouses in that sou l works like storm, giving vent to his spiritual emotion: he takes one of the drum s and begins to beat. Fiery, like a volcano in eruption, he throws off into space his ringing voice. Afte r a while Baba passes another intuition order which makes him stop and leave. Calm and peace  reign again after the exciting  in-terlude which is balm to all. 



On the 28th of December the expected telegram from Navsari arrives giving the announcem ent of Sorabji Desai's death on the 27th of December, twenty minutes after the m arriage ceremony, precisely timed by Baba as the cause of events proved. None of us feel surprised, as, on the p rescribed day, Baba in His executive way persistently kept i nquiring about news from Naysari. His m ind was visibly set upon this work. The work was to suspend death 'at will'. The day is spent in apparent excitement of external action. To serve Him , in these exe≠cutive moments of His work, we practise continuous concentration and attention, we cons ciously keep vigil upon the point on which He is focussing. At different occasions we may have to travel. We may be ordered to run back and forth between His place and the spot or the form on which He directs His divine spark. W e have to speak to people on the subject He will design. Baba directs the dram a of life and death using His unfathomable humour! Sorabji Desai's death had to be timed to conform also with external circumstances. The ceremony should he perform ed at the ordained hour and have the natural course of events without interruption by external shocks; the fam ily should be satisfied and the gue sts should rejoice. For this the miracle of suspending death 'at will' had to be perform ed with subtle tact and discretion. While reading the telegram Baba appeared very satisfied, and said, "Well done. "



    During the intense working hours of the morning an in teresting incident happens. From the other side of the city of Nagpur, cam e a man who is the guardian of Baba Tajuddin 's resting place. Tajuddin Baba was one of the five Perfect Masters who belonged to the powerful hierarchy that governs the inner affairs of m ankind on our m ater≠ial plane. He is acco mpanied by a young Parsi of prom inent family who, in his li fe of affai rs, tries to fight for honesty and justice but whose life is utter misery and unhappiness. T his young man has become a fervent seeker of Truth. Every morning at four o 'clock he would take his car and drive to the tomb  of Baba  Tajuddin. The young man, who is used to prayer, loves these hours of worship and holds to it with unusual steadfastness and determina≠tion; but thinking practically he realized that he was speculating on the Unseen, and, one day, questioned the guardian whether it would not be wiser for hi m to meet the alive Perfect Master. This pleased the guardian to a cer tain point only, as he did not lik e to see the g rave of his Bel oved Saduru deserted. He advised the young m an not to let his mind swerve with unnecessary con≠siderations, but go on with his regular routine of worship for th e Great Master who, in consciousness, is always present. 

A peculiar uncertainty and inner restlessness brought a decision in a moment of desperation. The young man made up his m ind to challenge the power of Tajuddin. He placed his wish before the still m onument which so f ar had revealed very little to him , and said: "If you are who you are, you will make it true that I m eet the aliv e Master."

 The guardian did not want his Beloved Sadguru to disappoint the young worshipper of Truth, so he, too, joined in his w ish. With persistent prayers he invoked the Beloved One to dem onstrate and fulfil the young m an 's wish. So it happens one morning the guardian hears the Voice of Tajuddin, speaking through intuition, that with in three m onths a living Sadguru would he in Nagpur. Three months later Shri Sadguru Meher Baba arrives in Nagpur. W hile the young Parsi stood before the holy monument, he was s ure that T ruth really is this Im personal Being who in Him gives the sign to react, but, through the inner order in intuition, is calling to purer order in conscience. He believes that it is the Voice of the same Pure Order in Being, as the Im personal One that ga ve the s ignal within to the guardian who is to lead the young m an to meet Shri Meher Baba, the person≠ification of the Impersonal One. We are all present in the room when the young Parsi and the guardian call on Baba 's Grace. The young m an now knows that Truth is re ality which becom es a f act and takes form in the alive person ified Impersonal One.  He knows that God is consciousness in Being; and when he sees Baba he knows that Tajuddin, or Baba, is the sam e Truth, the sam e Power, the sam e Life in conscious order in Pure Sub-stance. 



    The young man realizes that the lives of these Pure Beings are One Life in perpetual will-function, creating per≠petual attraction to Light of Life unconscious. The fact to have met Shri Meher Baba becom es, for the young man, an event of great importance. No doubt this Parsi wi ll experience in himself the way to Truth and, in himself, become conscious of the unconditional importance to be a subordinate in Being of one who is the Divine personified Pure Existence, as is Shri Meher Baba. 

    To be the disciple of a Perfect Master means to have in life no desire to satisfy the  'I' ; to have no want in Being but the prof ound longing to expand in Him as the Beloved and to exist and serve Him as His subject. To be or not to beótherein lies all the dif ficult question. It is hard to learn to live in subordination, but it is suprem e exper≠ience to 



realize resurrection of the Divine P art in Being as the want unfathom able that marks time in spiritual evolution. Life in selfless subordination in Him,  the 

Beloved, is the wish of all who dedicate their very lives to him , ready to accept any challenge for the f ulfilment of the long-lived dream to unite in Him with Life Eternal. 



(To be continued) 

ï 