  September 15, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       Draw Near to the Throne of Grace  with Confidence   (Hebrews 4:14-5:3)    Since then we have a great high priest who has passed through theheavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession. 15For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with ourweaknesses, but One who has been tempted in all things as we are,yet   without sin. 16 Let us therefore draw near with confidenceto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and may find graceto help in time of need. 5:1 For every high priest taken from amongmen is appointed on behalf of men in things pertaining to God, inorder to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins; 2 he can dealgently with the ignorant and misguided, since he himself also isbeset with weakness; 3 and because of it he is obligated to offersacrifices for sins, as for the people, so also for himself.    
      Why Did God Wait So Long to SendJesus?    Have you ever asked why God planned such a long history withIsrael before sending his Son into the world to die for our sins? Itwould be a big mistake to answer this by thinking that history runson its own power and that God has been trying to get it to do what hewants it to do for centuries, but just couldn't bring it off, and sothat's why it was 2,000 years between his choosing Abraham in Genesis12 and the coming of Christ in the book of Matthew.  That would be a mistake for two reasons. One is that the whole OldTestament pictures God as  ruling  history, not frustrated byhistory. For example the prophet Daniel says, "Let the name of God beblessed forever and ever, for wisdom and power belong to Him. And itis He who changes the times and the epochs; He removes kings andestablishes kings" (Daniel 2:20-21). So kings don't rise and fall ontheir own. And times and epochs of history don't change on their own.God governs all this.  King Nebuchadnezzar had to learn this the hard way. But after hewas driven crazy with pride, he praised the true God and said,  His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom endures  from generation to generation. And . . . He doesaccording to His will in the host of heaven and among the inhabitantsof earth; and no one can ward off His hand or say to Him, "What haveYou done?" (Daniel 4:34-34)  So it would be a mistake to think that history was running its owncourse and God was just waiting for something to happen that wouldallow him to get Jesus into the picture at an optimal time.  The other reason this would be a big mistake is that God hadplanned for Jesus to come and die and give us the grace offorgiveness even before there was a history to govern. For example,in 2 Timothy 1:9, Paul says,  [God] has saved us, and called us with a holy calling, notaccording to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace which was granted us in Christ Jesus from all eternity .  God planned the grace of our forgiveness in Christ beforecreation.  So we know two things: one is that from eternity God planned thedeath of Jesus for our sins, and the other is that God rules historyand so accomplishes his plans without difficulty.  So why then is there a two-thousand-year history of dealings withIsrael before sending Jesus into the world? God could have planned tosend Jesus in Noah's day or just after the Tower of Babel or in thedays of the bondage in Egypt. Why the long delay?    
      We Needed Categories to Help Us UnderstandJesus    One answer is that when the Son of God comes into the world thereneed to be some categories in place that make sense out of who he isand what he is coming to do. There needs to be a context for the Sonof God which interprets why he is here and what he is doing. That isone of the reasons for the history of Israel and the record of theOld Testament. It gives us the context and the categories forunderstanding who Jesus is and why he came.  This is why the missions and evangelistic strategy called  FirmFoundations  is so significant. It takes a person or a tribe ofpeople (as shown in the New Tribes Mission video  Ee Tauw )through weeks or even months of exposure to the Old Testament storiesin order to give a context for the gospel of Jesus Christ. Imaginegoing into a village that had never heard that God created the world,and that the world fell into sin, and that God gave a law for us toobey, and that there were priests and sacrifices and prophets andkings in the people of God. How would they ever make sense of Christand why he came?  If you try to skip the Old Testament and interpret Jesus withinyour own context first without the Biblical-historical context andcategories, you may make him a coach or a therapist or a good exampleor a guru or a mentor or a hero or a trail-blazer. And there may besome truth in each of these. But they will not be as true and deepand authoritative and helpful as the categories that the Bible itselfuses.  
    One Category: He is our High Priest    In our text today we have one of those Old Testament categoriesfor understanding who Jesus is and what he came to do, namely, thecategory of "high priest." Hebrews 4:14:  Since then we have a  great high priest  who has passedthrough the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast ourconfession.  Now there are no high priests around today. So this is a categoryfor understanding Jesus that is foreign to us. But God plannedcenturies of history with Israel, recorded in the Old Testament, sothat we would have a context for understanding this category. Thatmeans he thinks it is really important. We would impoverish ourselvesand swerve from the truth if we said, "Well, that's too old-fashionedand irrelevant for today. Nobody knows what a high priest is; solet's just translate Jesus into one of our familiar categories, say,defense attorney."  Instead what we need to do before we jump to contemporaryanalogies is to go back to God's context, God's history and God'sbook and learn some deep and wonderful things that we might otherwisemiss -- even to our peril -- because high priest does  not equal defense attorney or any other analogy in our society. Ourhistory is simply too limited to interpret Jesus. We need God'shistory. Our culture, our society, our era in time are way tooprovincial to give the needed categories for grasping who Jesus isand what he came to do.  So I thank God for the book of Hebrews. It is tough sledding attimes. But O the riches of seeing Jesus the way God planned to showhim as he designed the history and the religion of the Old Testament.It was all for Jesus. Jesus said in John 5:39,  You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you haveeternal life; and it is these that bear witness of Me.  One way or another it is all about Jesus. God was guiding thehistory of Israel as a backdrop to help make sense out of the comingof Jesus. The Old Testament is crucial background for going deep withthe work of Jesus.  Hebrews 5:1-3 gives us a little glimpse of who high priests werein the Old Testament religious life. Verse 1 says that high priestscame from among men and were appointed on behalf of the people tooffer gifts and sacrifices to God for sins. A whole world of meaningis opened up to us here. There is a God. There is sin. This sin hascreated a barrier between God and the people. But God has made aprovision for being reconciled to the people. He has ordained thatthere be human priests who would be a go-between; and that thesepriests would offer sacrifices. There would be the shedding of blood-- a kind of animal substitute for the sinner. God would look uponthis and turn his anger away from the people's sins.  But built into this priestly system were some inadequacies. Theone we see here in Hebrews 5:3 is that the high priest was himself asinner and had to offer sacrifices for his own sins as well as thesins of the people. This meant not only that his sympathy would beimperfect and his presence in the holy place with God limited; italso meant that he would die and have to be replaced. He could neverguarantee an ongoing presence with God to intervene for the people.All the inadequacies of the old priesthood will be clear as we goforward in the book of Hebrews. But that's the point of the wholehistory of Israel -- it is imperfect, inadequate, and incomplete. Itall points forward to something greater, to Someone perfect andcomplete. It points to Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our ultimate andperfect High Priest. In fact, even the sacrifices that the highpriest offers (5:3) point to Jesus, because Jesus is such a perfectand complete fulfillment of the priesthood that he is not only theHigh Priest, but he is also the sacrifice that the High Priest gives(Hebrews 9:12, 25-26; 13:12).  So let's look at what Hebrews 4:14-16 tell us about our perfect,final High Priest and what difference he makes in our 20th-centurylives.    
      Verse 14: Jesus, the Son of God, is Alive andwith God    Verse 14 tells us three crucial things: 1) Jesus is alive; 2) heis with God above the heavens; and 3) he is the Son of God.  Since then we have a great high priest who has passed through theheavens, Jesus the Son of God . . .  1) Unlike all the other high priests that ever lived and died,Jesus lived and died and rose from the dead never to die again. Thisis why the whole Old Testament system of the priesthood is over.Jesus is the final priest between man and God because he will neverdie. He has his priesthood by an indestructible life (Hebrews 7:16).We have a priest and he is alive.  2) He is also with God above the heavens. That he "passed throughthe heavens" calls to mind the ascension as Jesus rose through theclouds and through the sky into another realm, namely, the presenceof God himself. Before Christ, the holiest place of the tabernacle ortemple was entered once a year by the high priest. But that was justa shadow of the true Holy Place in heaven where God dwells. This iswhere our High Priest lives today. He has immediate access to God inheaven day and night. Hebrews 7:25 says, "He always lives to makeintercession for [us]."  3) He is the Son of God. He was not merely a human exalted to thispriestly place. He is the divine Son of God who created the earth andthe heavens (1:8-10). This gives his sacrifice its infinite worth.Jesus does not take the blood of bulls and goats into the heavenlytemple. Nor does he even take the blood of a mere human. He takes hisown precious blood, the blood of the Son of God (Hebrews 9:12). Andwhen God the Father sees  this  sacrifice for my sin, he says,"That is enough. The debt has been paid. My righteousness isvindicated. My glory is exalted." And he overlooks my punishedtransgression and counts me as his loved and innocent child.  So our High Priest is alive forever more; he is with God above theheavens in the holiest place in the universe; and he is the very Sonof God pleading my case by his own blood.    
      Verse 15: Jesus, Though Tempted, Never Gave in,and so is Sympathetic    Then in verse 15 we learn that, in spite of how lofty our HighPriest is (alive forever, in the presence of God, as the Son of God),nevertheless three other truths about him still stand:  1) he was tempted in all the kinds of ways we are; 2) he nevergave in and sinned; and 3) he is therefore sympathetic with us in ourweaknesses.  For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with ourweaknesses, but One who has been tempted in all things as we are,yet   without sin.  Fifty years ago C. S. Lewis imagined someone objecting here: "IfJesus never sinned, then he doesn't know what temptation is like. Helived a sheltered life and is out of touch with how strong temptationcan be." Here is what Lewis wrote in response to that objection:  A silly idea is current that good people do not know whattemptation means. This is an obvious lie. Only those who try toresist temptation know how strong it is. . . . A man who gives in totemptation after five minutes simply does not know what it would havebeen like an hour later. That is why bad people, in one sense knowvery little about badness. They have lived a sheltered life by alwaysgiving in. . . . Christ, because He was the only man who neveryielded to temptation, is also the only man who knows to the fullwhat temptation means -- the only complete realist.  Jesus can sympathize with us in our pain and our dying, because heexperienced excruciating pain and entered all the way into death. Andhe can sympathize with us in our allurements to sin, because he wastempted --  to lie (to save his life)  and to steal (to help his poor mother when his father died)  and to covet (all the nice things that Zaccheus owned)  and to dishonor his parents (when they were more strict thanothers)  and to take revenge (when he was wrongly accused)  and to lust (when Mary wiped his feet with her hair)  and to pout with self-pity (when his disciples fell asleep in hislast hour of trial)  and to murmur at God (when John the Baptist died at the whim of adancing girl)  and to gloat over his accusers (when they couldn't answer hisquestions)  Jesus knows the battle. He fought it all the way to the end. Andhe defeated the monster every time. So he was tested like we are andthe Bible says he is a sympathetic High Priest. He does not roll hiseyes at your pain or cluck his tongue at your struggle with sin.    
      So Hold Fast to Your Hope, and Draw Near toGod    Which all leads to this great, practical, relevant, twentiethcentury conclusion. Because he is alive, and in the presence of Godwith the sacrifice of the blood of the Son of God and full ofsympathy for his people,  therefore  two things: 1) verse 14b:"Let us hold fast our confession;" and 2) verse 16: "Let us come drawnear with confidence to the throne of grace."  The confession is simply our unshakable hope (10:23) that God isfor us and will work to bring us into his final rest and joy. Holdfast to that because you have a great High Priest. That's the firstconclusion. For weeks we have been seeing the call to hold fast andto be diligent and to take heed. Here we see it again. Only here thewriter is spreading out powerful reasons not only for why you shouldhold fast to your confession, but also why you  can ! God is foryou. You have a great High Priest. He is alive. He is in the presenceof God. He is the Son of God. He is sympathetic. So hold fast to yourhope.  But what practically do you do with your hope. That's the lastpoint, namely, verse 16:  Let us therefore draw near with confidence to the throne of grace,that we may receive mercy and may find grace to help in time of need.  Now listen carefully as we close, because this is incrediblyimportant. Everyone of us needs help. We are not God. We have needs.We have weaknesses. We have confusion. We have limitations of allkinds. We need help.  But everyone of us has something else: we have sins. And thereforeat the bottom of our hearts we know that we do not deserve the helpwe need. And so we feel trapped. I need help to live my life and tohandle death and to cope with eternity -- help with my family, myspouse, my children, my loneliness, my job, my health, my finances. Ineed help. But I don't deserve the help I need.  So what can I do? I can try to deny it all and be a superman whodoesn't need any help. Or I can try to drown it all and throw my lifeinto a pool of sensual pleasures. Or I can simply give way to theparalysis of despair.  But God declares over this hopeless conclusion: Jesus Christbecame a High Priest to shatter that despair with hope and to humblethat superman or superwoman and to rescue that drowning wretch.  Yes, we all need help. Yes, none of us deserves the help we need.But  no  to despair and pride and lechery. Look at what Godsays. Because we have a great High Priest, the throne of God is athrone of  grace . And the help we get at that throne is mercyand grace to help in time of need. Grace to help! Not  deserved help, gracious help.  This is the whole point of the Old and New Testaments. God plannedfor a High Priest, a Savior, a Redeemer, a gracious Helper.  You are not trapped. Say no to that lie. We need help. We don'tdeserve it. But we can have it. You can have it right now andforever. If you will receive and trust in your High Priest, Jesus theSon of God, and draw near to God through him. Amen.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
