Sunday, December 11, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Only let your manner of life be as it becometh the Gospel of Christ;  that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of  your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving  together for the faith of the Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your  adversaries; which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to  you of salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given in the  behalf of Christ not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His  sake." Phil. 1:27-29.  Some verses of Scripture are so powerful that they sparkle and shine due to the impact they immediately have upon the mind and the soul. As I analyze this short passage, there are three such power points in the above passage; to wit: Point #1.) "That ye stand fast in one spirit," is a glorious attribute that always identifies true New Testament Churches; and, I am thrilled to say, stamps Westboro Baptist Church as authentic in the eyes of an innumerable company of angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect; "so that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord. NOW I BESEECH YOU, BRETHREN, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, THAT YE ALL SPEAK THE SAME THING, THAT THERE BE NO DIVISIONS AMONG YOU, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment." 1 Cor. 1:7-10. Point #2.) "And in nothing terrified by your adversaries; which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God." Phil. 1:28. Now, Beloved, nothing is more important to the Elect of God than to have strong evidence (positive proof) that he is, indeed, one of God's highly favored few whom God has not appointed unto destruction (i.e., WRATH; to wit: "For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, Who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with Him. Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do." 1 Thes. 5:9-11). We are engaged in a great spiritual warfare, and nothing is more clearly taught in the Scripture than that fact. And our adversaries are mighty and consist of Satan and his demons ­ plus myriads of demon-possessed men. Satan and his troops spend endless hours pacing about to and fro over the earth seeking whom he may devour. Think of a powerful, restless, starving, lion ­ and you have the Bible representation of this vile creature at 1 Peter 5:8,9; to which add the great red dragon of the Revelation, and you have the ADVERSARIES referred to in Phil. 1:28; to wit:  "And in nothing terrified by YOUR ADVERSARIES; WHICH IS TO them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God." (Phil. 1:28)  And now, Beloved, let us flesh out the Bible portrait of the SATANIC LION AND THE SATANIC GREAT RED DRAGON; to wit: "Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren in the world. But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto His eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen." (1 Peter 5:8-11)  Sunday, December 11, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  So much for the Satanic Lion. Now, for the Satanic Dragon; to wit: "And there appeared another  wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven  crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth." Rev. 12:3-4. It is written that the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to the pulling down of Satan's strong holds; and it is evident that much in the way of warfare takes place in psychological and spiritual ­ other-worldly realms ­ where we also must compete.  "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds." (2 Cor. 10:3-4)  "And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death." (Rev. 12:7-11)  Beloved, here one of the very names by which the Great Red Dragon is called, is "the Accuser of Our Brethren Which Accused Them Before Our God Day AND NIGHT." Rev. 12:10. Could  words be stronger or more descriptive or more calculated to strike terror into the human breast? And yet we read that NOTHING our adversaries do or say can possibly terrify God's precious Elect. Furthermore, this fact of practicable invincibility is undoubted proof that our "calling and election is sure;" to wit: "According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain  unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue;  Whereby are given us exceeding great and precious promises; that by these ye might be partakers  of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. And beside  this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to your virtue knowledge; and to  knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; And to godliness  brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound,  they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus  Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that  he was purged from his old sins. Wherefore the rather, brethren, GIVE DILIGENCE TO MAKE YOUR CALLING AND ELECTION SURE: for if ye do these things" ­ (i.e., spend your days in diligently seeking to get ahold of some undoubted proof that you are God's Elect) ­ "For if ye do  these things, ye shall never fall; for so an entrance shall be administered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 2 Pet. 1:3-11.  We have seen that the very fact that our adversaries have no power to exert a Satanic in terrorem effect upon us is proof positive that we are God's Elect, saved now and forever, and that God has not appointed us unto wrath but to save us from the wrath to come, but rather has inscribed us in the Lamb's Book of Life; But, the very fact that our adversaries have no power to terrify us, is also proof positive that those same adversaries are sealed for total destructions in the Lake of Fire, which the Bible calls PERDITION. Words cannot be plainer, and we should honor those words in total vindication of our Father's Wisdom and Justice and Mercy in the choice and arrangement of those Words in formulating them at Phil. 1:28; to-wit:  Sunday, December 11, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And in nothing terrified by your adversaries; which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God." (Phil. 1:28)  Put another way: The very fact that fags, with all the powers of government, academia, churches, media, industry, military ­ and every other level of society ­ yet cannot silence this little church ­ is proof positive that we are going to Heaven, and they are going to Hell. Phil. 1:28. And, finally, Point #3.) "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake; having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me." Phil. 1:29,30. O, Beloved, how blessedly simple is this Gospel message which God has entrusted us at Westboro Baptist Church to preach continuously from this humble place to the whole world ­ since 1954. I have been doing some happy reminiscing lately, "according to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better: Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith; That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again. Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel." Phil. 1:20-27.  Now, Beloved, this verse points to a similar passage at the beginning of this sermon, and, in many practical ways, constitutes the sine qua non (i.e., without which, nothing) of New Testament Church truth perpetuity; to wit: "Now I beseech you, brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment." (1 Cor. 1:10) "Only let your conversation be as it becometh the Gospel of Christ; that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the Gospel." (Phil. 1:27)  One spirit; One mind; One mouth; One judgment; Etc. Striving together and contending (i.e., to the point of being contentious!) for the faith once and for all delivered to the saints. Jude 3. Early in the history of this humble little church we were plunged inescapably into the fiercest kind of religious debate, and I do not see how it is possible to avoid those flames of religious controversy from growing higher and hotter as the years roll by ­ without denying our dear Lord Jesus Christ ­ grievously ­ over and over again! For example, My employer in those days was a leading member of the Church of Christ located at Huntoon and College in Topeka, and he hounded me until I agreed to a four-night debate in October 28-31, 1957 (NOTE: the last night of the debate, Oct. 31, was Halloween, and also it was the night our little daughter Shirley was born ­ truly a child of debate and a blessing from God.)  Looking back, the publicity was extensive, and, notwithstanding my own youth and inexperience, constituted eight solid hours of pure Gospel preaching. See, enclosed newspaper ad with questions under dispute; to wit: RESOLVED: The Bible teaches that a child of God, one who has been saved by the blood of Christ, can never so sin as to be finally lost. Fred Phelps, affirming; Doyle Cannon, denying; RESOLVED: The Bible teaches that water baptism, to the penitent believer, is essential to  Sunday, December 11, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  his salvation. Doyle Cannon, Affirming; Fred Phelps, Denying. Fred Phelps, pastor of Westboro Baptist Church, 3701 West 12th, will represent the Baptist position. Doyle Cannon, minister of the  Church of Christ, Huntoon and College, will represent the Church of Christ position.  Look again at the substance of the points in dispute, and see Arminian heresy, denying such precious TULIP doctrines as the Perseverance (P) of the Saints. There is no question that the socalled Church of Christ is none other than the old heretical Campbell, founded many years ago by the backslidden Baptist preacher, Alexander Campbell, who was voted out of the Baptists, so he started his own Arminian church. Our early American name for these heretics was "Campbellites," and I insisted that advertising for our 4-night debate include Acts 17:11; to wit: "They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so." The public is cordially invited, Bring your Bible, Come each night, Begins next Mon. eve.Thur., Oct. 28,- Oct. 31 ­ 1957­ Copies of 1957 Campbellite/Baptist debate newspaper advertising are available on the table in front of the pulpit.  Also available on the table in front of the pulpit is a rather large newspaper ad dated Sat., May 10, 1980 ­ some 32 years ago ­ setting forth certain historical and doctrinal information vital to the ministry of Westboro Baptist Church; to wit: Westboro Baptist Church, 3701 W. 12th, Topeka, Kansas; Organized May 20, 1956, with continuous services thereafter each Sunday at 11 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. the year around. Existing for the Elect of God, and, "That in all things He might have the preeminence." (Col. 1:18) In spite of peril, toil, and pain, Our course be onward still; We sow Topeka's barren plain; We'll reap on Zion's Hill! Celebrating our 24th Anniversary. Twenty-four years in this place, contending earnestly for the faith that was once delivered to the saints. And against all lovers of Arminianism and the heresies of free-willism, maintaining and defending pure gospel truth. "Remove Not The Ancient Landmark, Which Thy Fathers Have Set" Using this text from Prov. 22:28, and showing that the ancient doctrines of the primitive church are singularly and exclusively adequate for today's needs. That no other way gives rest to the soul. That the oracles of God ­ the utterances and decrees of the Almighty ­ have not been modified or amended in any degree whatsoever. That man is still totally depraved. That his only hope is unconditional election. That the death of the Savior was limited in its design for the elect only. That irresistible grace will certainly and effectually call all God's sheep to salvation. And that the redeemed on earth will certainly persevere to eternal life.  Q: Why did they call them "TULIP BAPTISTS?"  A: Because they believed the "5 POINTS OF CALVANISM."  Point 1: Total Depravity. (The human race is totally depraved and lost.) Point 2: Unconditional Election. (A few ­ a remnant ­ of our lost race are elected by God to be saved.)  Point 3: Limited Atonement. (Christ died only for those elected few and for no others of mankind.) Point 4: Irresistible Grace. (Those elect few ­ and each of them ­ will most certainly be saved.) Point 5: Perseverance of Saints. (Those elect few ­ and each of them ­ will most certainly persevere to the end and arrive in Heaven at last.)  I love you.  Amen.  
