



Question Baba Answers 

SERIES BY ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Question

 Is 'consciousness' we are aware of in the human form, the same in all the spiritual planes? Answer 

The unfoldment of consci≠ousness in the lower evolution≠ary stages, mineral, vegetable and animal, is perfected in the human form. The conscious≠ness you have now in the hu≠man form continues the same throughout all the spiritual planesóthe subtle, mental and supra-mental. There is this difference. In the lower evolutionary process culminat≠ing in the human, the con≠sciousness at various stages differs in point of degree. It is a continuous process of un≠foldment, always progressive, resulting in the full and com≠plete consciousness of the human form. In the planes, however, the perfected consci≠ousness of the human remains 



the same, but its scope or field  Infinite difference between the  

of play becomes extensively  consciousness of the subtle and  

extended.  mental, mental and supra- 

For instance: you are now  mental. This difference is  

conscious only of the gross  sharp and defined, as there is  

plane, the subtle and mental  no point of fusion or expansion  

worlds you are not aware of.  as that which exists when  

Likewise, one in the subtle  consciousness was unfolding.  

plane has consciousness of the  It is on this account that one in  

subtle world only, and is not  the subtle plane identifies  

conscious of the gross and the  himself with that plane and  

mental; also one in the mental  deems this consciousness to be  

plane has the consciousness of  Perfection. Similarly, one in  

the mental plane only, and is  the mental plane identifies  

not aware of the gross or the  himself with the mental plane  

subtle; one in the seventh  and the consciousness hereof is  

planeóthe supra-mental, the  considered as Perfection. It is  

plane of perfectionóhas con- no Perfection at all; it is an  

sciousness of all the planes, the  illusion, rather self-delusion. 

mental, the subtle, the gross.  You can now understand  

You can thus see the  why one gets stuck in the plane  

consciousness of the human  where one is. It is extremely  

form obtains throughout, and  difficult for such an one to step  

the field of play varies not in  into the mental plane from the  

degree but in depth and  subtle. It is impossible for one  

extensiveness. In evolution  to go from the mental into the  

there is a definitely deter≠ supra-mental unless helped by  

minable difference in the  a Master.  

various stages of consciousness  There is as much difference  

which is an incessant and  between the consciousness (in  

persistent state of unfoldment  extensiveness) of the sixth and  

resulting in the all complete  seventh plane, as that between  

consciousness of the human  an ant and a human being. The  

form. In the higher planes,  seventh plane connotes Perfec≠ 

although this consciousness  tion, here one becomes con- 

remains the same, there is  sciousness itself.  

ï  
