
report

halab

tribal

asseMblies

The Islamic State has an extensive history of building relations with the tribes within its borders in an effort to strengthen the ranks of the Muslims, unite them under one imam, and work together towards the establishment of the prophetic Khilafah. Its practice of attending tribal forums, addressing the concerns of the tribal leaders and accepting their bay’ah is regularly met with success.

Last month, following instructions from the head of Public Relations in Wilayat Halab, the wilayah’s head of Tribal Affairs attended a meeting with the following tribal representatives:

the elders and dignitaries of the tribes of albu khamis the elders and dignitaries of the tribes of banu sa’id the elders and dignitaries of the tribes of al-‘awn the elders and dignitaries of the tribes of the area of

al-khafsah and its surrounding regions, foremost of them

being the tribes of al-Ghanim

The head of Tribal Affairs began the meeting with words of welcome, respect and thanks for the invitation. He then spoke about the fact that the mission of the Islamic State is neither local nor regional, but rather global. Furthermore, he called to implementing the Shari’ah, establishing the religion, promoting virtue and preventing vice.

He also spoke about the recent victories in Iraq, including the liberation of Wilayat Ninawa, the freeing of the prisoners of Ahlus- Sunnah, taking control of Mosul airport and Maliki’s army bases, the demolition of the Sykes-Picot borders thus opening the way between Iraq and Sham, and much more. In this regard, he stated: “We announce a new legacy of victories, further construction of the Islamic State and expansion of its territory.” The head of Tribal Affairs also stressed that this assembly was for the purpose of meeting with the tribes, helping and communicating with them, working to fulfill their needs, and cooperating with them in piety and righteousness.

In return, the Islamic State (may Allah honor it) requested from its dignified, Arab tribes, and in particular the tribe of Banu Sa’id, their backing, support, allegiance, advice, and du’a’. It also requested that they assist the Islamic State with their wealth, their sons, their men, their weapons, their strength and their opinion, and encourage their sons and their brothers to join the military body of the Islamic State.

dabiq

the doubts being circulated about the Islamic State such as withdrawing and retreating from the areas they control, abandoning them and handing them over to the regime, extremism, takfir, harshness and expulsion.

Furthermore, he listed the benefits and services provided by the Islamic State, including:

returning rights and property to their right- ful owners

pumping millions of

dollars into services that are important to the Muslims

the state of security and stability enjoyed by the areas under the islamic state’s authority

ensuring the availability of food products and

commodities in the mar- ket, particularly bread the reduced crime rate The flourishing relation - ship between the islam- ic state and its citizens

12

Likewise, he responded to some of

13

-----------------------------------------------------Page 7-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
report

dabiq

More recently, represen- tatives of the Islamic State attended another such meeting of tribal leaders in Wilayat Halab at the gener- ous invitation of the leaders and dignitaries of the tribe of Bu Batush.

The assembly took place in Tal Fid- dah in the area of Maskanah, with a number of the Islamic State’s amirs, commanders, and soldiers in atten- dance. The meeting concluded with the leaders, dignitaries, and many of the tribe’s members giving bay’ah to the Islamic State and pledging to de- fend and support it.

During the course of the meeting, a number of things were requested from the tribal dignitaries, the most important of which were the following:

collecting the zakah and pre- senting it to the zakah offices located throughout the wilayah preparing lists with the

names of orphans, widows and the needy so that zakah and sadaqah can be distrib- uted to them

encouraging the youth to join the ranks of the islamic state

turning in any weapon

acquired from the regime or the fsa

urging those bearing arms against the

islamic state to repent before they are captured

At the conclusion of the gathering, several of the tribal elders and dignitaries in attendance announced their bay’ah to the Islamic State.

14

15

-----------------------------------------------------Page 8-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
report

tal afar liberated

dabiq

On Monday, the 25th of Sha'ban, the mujahidin of the Islamic State succeeded in liberating the strategic town of Tal Afar in Wilayat Ninawa.

sunnis murdered by the safawis

Before fleeing in the face of the Islamic State's advance, the Safawi forces executed a number of Muslim prisoners.

sunnis murdered by the safawis

Located approximately 50km west of the city of Mosul, Tal Afar is a predominantly Sunni town with a significant Rafidi minority.

sunnis murdered by the safawis

16

17

-----------------------------------------------------Page 9-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
report

dabiq

rafidi soldiers Killed by the mujahidin

18

19

