Sunday, April 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And the Lord SPAKE unto Moses, saying, SPEAK unto the  children of Israel, and SAY unto them, I am the Lord your God.  After the doings of THE LAND OF EGYPT, wherein ye dwelt,  SHALL YE NOT DO: and after the doings of THE LAND OF  CANAAN, whither I bring you, SHALL YE NOT DO: neither shall ye  walk in their ordinances. Ye shall do my judgments, and keep  mine ordinances, to walk therein: I am the Lord your God. Ye  shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a  man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord. NONE OF YOU  SHALL APPROACH TO ANY THAT IS NEAR OF KIN TO HIM, TO  UNCOVER THEIR NAKEDNESS. I AM THE LORD." Lev. 18:1-6.  (Lev. 18:1-6 is the general preamble and mandatory prohibition of every kind of INCEST whatsoever. Thereafter a LIST ­ Lev. 18:6-18 ­ containing many particular kinds of vile, sinful and disgusting INCEST is provided.) But the LIST is by no means exhaustive. Last week we considered the LIST, and found it to be equally cautionary and binding upon Egyptians (where Jews had absorbed incest, idolatry, and moral decadence for hundreds of years); and we also found the LIST to be cautionary and binding upon Canaanites (where Jews were about to plunge into a sea of moral and spiritual Gentile filth for many more hundreds of years). Considering the complexity of the subject, the preamble hereto is a marvel of brevity; to wit: "None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness: I am the Lord." (Lev. 18:6) God's word for it: Incest works hand-in-hand, and in tandem with Idolatry and Sodomy ­ spelling certain Doom. Almost NEVER do modern-day ­ or ANY day ­ preachers for that matter, preach from chapter 18 of Leviticus ­ in spite of the urgency God Himself has given to the matter at the first two verses thereof. And I mean urgency that the matter be SPOKEN by Moses, vis-à-vis WRITTEN. Are these modern-day, kissypoo preachers too embarrassed? to speak from the pulpit WORDS that God has spoken? I believe it is a serious error. Do these preachers believe that they are holier than God? Do these preachers fear criticism from the filthy, vile-mouthed rabble on their way inevitably to Hell.  This chapter opens with God directly SPEAKING to Moses, and ordering Moses to SPEAK directly and plainly to the people ­ on such sensitive subjects as all forms of incest, (to utmost degrees of sanguinity or blood kin), adultery, fornication, sexual perversion, sodomy, and bestiality, etc. Recall, Beloved, how God Almighty opens the chapter, and how He seals the sharp commands to SPEAK by referencing His own ALMIGHTINESS; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, SPEAK unto the children of Israel, and SAY UNTO THEM, I am the Lord your God." (Lev. 18:1,2) As much as if it were God Himself saying, "Don't be so squeamish with me. I know you, and how filthy you are;" to wit: "For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart."  Sunday, April 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things  are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do."  (Heb. 4:12,13)  And now we come upon what used to be looked upon as a somewhat strange Divine prohibition;  to wit: "And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech." Lev. 18:21. I  say, the thing herein prohibited ­ (i.e., burning little babies alive as part of a pagan religious  ceremony), ­ USED TO BE looked upon as somewhat strange. But that was before the advent of  the worldwide popularity of the Antichrist Beast Obama, and the likes of Tiller aka Dr. Death  aka Dr. Bloody-Murderer-for-hire. Now ­ in this day and age ­ the language and utterances of  the old prophets reads and sounds like our daily secular news and bloody media outlets; to wit:  "But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward. Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them: Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: THEY DID WORSE THAN THEIR FATHERS. Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them, but they will not answer thee. But thou shalt say unto them; This is a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth correction; truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth." (Jer. 7:24-28)  God is punishing America ­ and, indeed, the whole world ­ by installing the bloody murderer Obama as president of the United States. This trashy, evil, Antichrist Obama has sworn on his solemn oath ­ going in, no surprises ­ I say, Obama has sworn to use the White House as a worldwide Bully Pulpit, and the full powers of the presidency itself to promote unlimited, unrestricted, worldwide, USA-tax-funded abortions; and sodomy.  There, Beloved, ­ two little words ­ that fairly define Obama's presidency; to wit: ABORTION, and, SODOMY. God has a hook in Obama's nose. He may manipulate the rabble and call that democracy. He may mangle and distort tiny bits of Bible texts and verses, and call that christianity. God's Elect are safe. They cannot be seduced or deceived. Neither can they be defeated in this holy war; ergo, "Finally, (or, rather, intermediately), my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might." Eph. 6:10.  Like the Bible doctrine of the outrageous eating of one's own babies, so severe will be the siege upon Jerusalem by the Babylonians ­ near the end ­ Comes now a kindred Bible doctrine of the burning alive of infants as an offering to the pagan god Molech; to wit: "And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech." (Lev. 18:21) Like eating or cannibalizing one's own infants when one is literally starving to death, those vile creatures have no justification whatsoever ­ only the sick explanation that their pagan god Molech requires human sacrifices to make him happy. Jeremiah, who exposed Judah for EATING their babies, also exposed them for BURNING THEIR BABIES ALIVE IN THE FIRES OF MOLECH; to wit:  Sunday, April 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord: they have  set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it.  And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son  of Hinnom, TO BURN THEIR SONS AND THEIR DAUGHTERS IN THE FIRE;  which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. Therefore,  behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be called Tophet,  nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but THE VALLEY OF SLAUGHTER: for they  shall bury in Tophet, till there be no place. And the carcases of this people  shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and  none shall FRAY them away." (Jer. 7:30-33)  Beloved, some years ago there came into my possession from a local Topeka historian of sorts some information, whereby, when connected to some parts of the Bible, led me to conclude the distinct possibility ­ even the probability ­ that the word "TOPHET" means "TOPEKA," and which in turn means "HELL." On some early maps left by French trappers, Topeka is identified by some early French nomenclature as, "Topage," meaning "a noisy din (a mixture of loud and discordant noises)." R. Jarchi says "Tophet had its name from the beating of drums by the pagan priests of Molech, that the parents of the children that were burnt might not hear the cry of them."  Beloved, this matter was reported substantially as I related it above by the Capital-Journal daily newspaper, four or five years ago. And does it seem far-fetched, after what we have been through here, that the name of this place, accurately, should be called "HELL?" With a zip-code of 666, the mark of the Beast (Rev. 13:18); and a moniker of "The Golden City," the ancient name for Babylon, the arch-enemy of God's true church on earth. Isa. 14:4. Beloved. It is very difficult to believe that the ancient Jews and/or Gentiles actually worshiped Molech by burning their children alive to the idol's praise and glory. Yet, there it is, in all its pagan stupidity, and centuries full of baby bones accumulated in the pagan valley of slaughter, where the screams of the tortured and dying babies, the sobs and wailing of the multitudes of stupid, murderous parents, and the wild beating of the drums and cymbals by row after row of Molech's ignoramus murdering priests ­ striving vainly to drown out the bloody racket ­ a NOISY DIN, indeed.  Gill: "And they have built the high places of Tophet," ­ (i.e., Topeka), ­ "where was the idol Molech; and which place had its name from the beating of drums, that the parents of the children that were burnt might not hear the cry of them; which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, a valley near Jerusalem, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which was done by putting them into the arms of the brazen image Molech, heated hot." The account he gives of Tophet is this: "Tophet is Molech, which was made of brass; and they heated him from his lower parts; and his hands being stretched out, and made hot; they put the child between his hands, and it was burnt; when it vehemently cried out; but the priests beat a drum, that the father might not hear the voice of his son, and his bowels might not be moved. The brazen image stretched out his hands, inclining to the earth; so that a child put upon them rolled down, and fell into a chasm of fire."  A huge killing industry ­ about a trillion dollars a year ­ has now replaced the great idol god Molech in the valley of Tophet aka the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is now called the valley of Slaughter. With the black whoremonger Obama now in the White House, and breathing  Sunday, April 19, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  out threatenings and slaughter (Acts 9:1) for those who do not support sodomy and the slaughter  of the innocents, we might anticipate unprecedented slaughter; to wit:  "For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it." (Isa. 30:33)  Beloved. Glorious things lie just ahead for the saints of God, now that Antichrist Beast Obama is  on the scene, and is doing and saying just what Antichrist would be expected to do and say. We  must watch and pray. For example, one anecdotal slip from Obama's big mouth is worth a  hundred cold, academic, textbook sermons on the subject of the final run-up to Antichrist and  doom. E.g., Obama has his bloody knife ready to kill his own grandchildren ­ (by his own  admission, in his own words) ­ if one of his daughters is careless and has an unwanted  pregnancy. Listen to Obama's bloody, murderous words; to wit: "We've got two daughters nine  years old and six years old. I'm going to teach them first of all about values and morals, but if  they make a mistake, I don't want them punished with a baby."  Beloved, that is a monster speaking. A BEAST. WBC intends to tie those bloody words around Obama's neck and never let him forget them. Those are eternal words ­ as those of Pharaoh and Herod, ordering the Slaughter of the Innocents. Ex. 1:16; Mat. 2:16. "Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and SLEW ALL THE CHILDREN THAT WERE IN BETHLEMEN, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men." (Mat. 2:16) Beloved. This is breathtaking. Obama has joined the ranks of the bloody tyrants of history. Reversing Executive Orders which have the force of law, Obama has ordered that our tax money ­ to the tune of billions (maybe even trillions, especially when AIDS money is added) ­ be squandered third-worldwide, paying for abortions on demand ­ again I say, WORLDWIDE. This is the voice of the Beast ­ coming with the gentle horns of a lamb, but speaking with the voice of a dragon; to wit: "And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon." (Rev. 13:11)  Now Obama is fiddling with another Executive Order, which the press has dubbed, the "Conscience Rule" because it allows all health care workers and pharmacists to refuse services broadly related to abortion. Simply put, if a 9-month pregnant mother presents at the hospital and demands that her baby be murdered, our loved ones who work in those hospitals would be compelled to help with the murder ­ or be fired and not allowed to work in another hospital ­ and may be prosecuted criminally. I predict that Obama will eventually sign this murderous Executive Order. Thereby "framing (Satanic) mischief by a law." Psa. 94:20.  Beloved, we live in most exciting and glorious times. Let us watch and pray. "Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord... stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." (Jas. 5:7,8)  I love you.  Amen.  
