

Chips from a Dravidian-Wisdom 
Workshop 

BY  C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR 
II 
I-ness is Spiritual Death 

THE first Sloka (verse) in Bhagavat Gita is: 
ìTell me, 0 Sanjaya! Assembled on the field of Kurukshetra, the land of Dharma, desirous to fight, what indeed did my people (mamaka) and the Pandavas do?î 
This question was put by Dhritarashtra to Sanjaya. This verse discloses to us some important truths of spiritual value. The parties are in a place which is the centre of spiritual activity. If only the old Dhritarashtra had exercised his Iswara-sense in him, he would have prevented bloodshed. But his I-ness got the upperhand, He could not see that his sons and his brother's sons were the same to him. His invidious distinction between ìmy sonsî and ìthe Pandavasî is very significant. The idea of  ìmineî began to reign supreme in his heart. And this was the beginning of the end. Pride goes before one's fall. Siriyattan therefore truly said that this I-ness (the distinction between 'mine' and 'not mine') was the cause of the utter destruction of the Kuru race. 
The pater-familias must set a good example. The father Dhritarashtra was full of I-ness. His son Duryodana was influenced by his example. Their prarabdha karma was irresistible. True the Perfect Masters Drona and Bhishma were by their side. But if the individual soul does not approach the Perfect Master's feet with modesty, the latter cannot easily remove the effect of its prarabdha karma. That is why the Gitacharya emphatically said: "Relin-quishing all Dharmas take refuge in Me alone: I will liberate you from all sins: Do not grieve" (Chap. 18. 66). 

CHIPS FROM A DRAVIDIAN-WISDOM WORKSHOP 
The word ''all dharmas'' must be properly understood. By "all sins" is meant "all bonds created by what we call dharma and adharma ''. There is nothing like positive evil and positive good. When Shri Baba was asked, "Have you solved the problem of evil?" The answer was, "There is no evil. There are only degrees of good''. Our actionsócall them good or badóminus I-ness is real sacrifice: it is then you dedicate yourself to Him. The "bond'' disappears, and you see the ''Iswara'' within you. It required seventeen chapters to impress this Truth on even a willing sishya (disciple). And then says Arjuna, "My delusion has gone" (18. 73). 
In five simple words our dear Baba compressed the whole spiritual secret: "What is your secret''? he was asked. The ready reply in a nutshell was, "The elimination of the ego". He who does work selflessly is a true sanyasi, true yogi (Gita, VI. 1). 
Saint Nammazhvar says (Tiruvaimozhi, 1. 2-3): "Pluck out with roots the 'I-ness', 'My-ness' in you, and join the Lord." This is true renunciation. It is of the  mind. Shri Baba says, "It is the mind that makes us slaves to worldy desires. The mind also can enable us to become the masters of destiny and to realize the Supreme Self." 

Mere renouncing the world is not true renunciation. The story of Jada-Bharata illustrates my point. (Vishnu Purana and Bhaga≠vata.) He renounced the world and resided in the woods far away from the haunts of men. He became attached by affection to a deer, and it is said that he had to take the life of a deer. It is there≠fore clear that giving up 'I-ness'ó attachmentóis real renunciation. Saint Nammazhvar exclaimed,   "I, not understanding myself, was attached to ' I ' and 'Mine''' (Bhagavad-Vishaya). 
The Christ said: ''If any man come unto Me and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also he cannot be My disciple." This is wrongly interpreted. The Lord Jesus does not ask us to hate our parents in the ordinary sense of the word. He who directs us not to hate even our enemies, would not say that we should 
hate our parents. The meaning is that we should not be unduly attached to things material if we wish to go on the Path chalked out by the Master. The whole of the Bhagavat Gita is a sermon on true renunciation. 
Persons on the Path must therefore beware of the demon I≠ness. If he successfully lures them, they are fallen. If not, they reach the goal. If the demon succeeds, it is the spiritual death of the unfortunate aspirant. 
"The chief props and agents of Maya are Kama, Krodh and Lobh (lust, anger and greed). Unless and until you subjugate them it is impossible for you to  enter  upon the path that leads to union with God,î says Shri Baba. Unless one tries his best to conquer these wily enemies every minute of his lifeóat home first and then outside homeóhe can never hope to enter the Path. He must be going round and round in the whirlpool of Maya, and adding to his sanskaras. Sankaras, egoism. No sanskaras, no egoism. 

"The grace of a God-realized Master works wonders, but one must extort this grace from him", says Shri Baba. 
Master Nanjiyar used to say, "Whenever I saw a saint I fell at his feet. My hunger vanished"ó for Saints are Gods on earth. 
