Sunday, August 28, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life; he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. ... All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. ...NO MAN CAN COME TO ME, EXCEPT THE FATHER WHICH HATH SENT ME DRAW HIM; and I will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh to me. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life. ...And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that NO MAN CAN COME UNTO ME, EXCEPT IT WERE GIVEN HIM OF MY FATHER. From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve? Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, LORD, TO WHOM SHALL WE GO? THOU HAST THE WORDS OF ETERNAL LIFE. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon; for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve." John 6:35,37-40,44-45,65-71.  This passage is one of the most powerful, mysterious, and beautiful in all the Scriptures ­ which  establishes, unmistakably, the glorious doctrine of UNCONDITIONAL ELECTION. And, it provides  the "U" in the acronym TULIP, which in turn identifies a helpful shorthand version of a theological  system known as The Five Points of Calvinism. As such, the little acronym TULIP serves a very useful  purpose. Those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, faithfully, come to love and daily utilize the little TULIP. Although this sermon deals mostly with the U in the TULIP ­ i.e., Unconditional Election ­ here is a bit of refresher material due to the necessary interconnection and mutual dependence of each of these Five Points upon the other; to wit: 1) TOTAL DEPRAVITY. Man's fall in Eden was total; when he  sinned he died spiritually, and spiritual death has passed upon all men. Fallen man therefore has no more power of his own will to believe the gospel and receive salvation than he has to keep the law; 2) UNCONDITIONAL ELECTION. God of His own sovereign will, from all eternity made choice of a multitude of sinners to be redeemed by Christ, given faith, and brought to glory. 3) LIMITED ATONEMENT. The goal of the work of Christ was the redemption of the Elect. Full atonement was made absolutely for that number and not as a remedy for sin on a "take it or leave it basis." 4)  IRRESISTIBLE GRACE. When the Holy Spirit seizes upon a man to work grace within, He never fails. He is never frustrated or defeated. The Elect are all effectually called. 5) PERSEVERANCE OF THE  SAINTS. Believers are kept in faith and grace by the power of God until they are received into glory. The hallmark of a man's salvation is that he perseveres in the things of God and so gives diligence to make his calling and election sure. Thus, in brief, is the essence of the Gospel, and if anyone comes bringing any other so-called gospel, "LET HIM BE ACCURSED." Gal. 1:8. Some of the strongest language in the Scriptures. "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha" ­ (i.e., Let him be damned in Hell forever, and, Return, Lord Jesus, in power and glory, and execute that sentence). Ergo, "Anathema Maranatha!" 1 Cor. 16:22.  "If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that biddeth him God speed IS PARTAKER OF HIS EVIL DEEDS." (2 John 10,11)  Sunday, August 28, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  These strong and somewhat harsh words of warning to the church are a signal that very important matters are being discussed; and, to the little sheep, God's elect, alone, trembling in the frightful darkness and the storms of life, ­ I say, to that little sheep, nothing is more important than the voice of the Great Shepherd of the Sheep expounding the sweet, comforting words of Unconditional Election. This is a subject which has been the centre of much controversy throughout history, and still is; although, in this age, many seem to know very little about this all-important doctrine of Holy Writ. Those who have a fixed opinion on the matter are divided into two camps known as Calvinist and Arminian; after John Calvin and Jacobus Arminius. However, that which we are considering now goes back far beyond the days of Calvin or Arminius. They were but champions of the two lines of a controversy already in existence ­ one Biblical and the other not ­ and there is no alternative to these two. All who have given any thought to this matter are to be found in one or other of these two schools.  However, it is not the object of WBC's Pulpit either to extol Calvin or to denounce Arminius. We intend  to boldly expound the doctrines of grace, faithfully expose the errors of both heretics Calvin AND Arminius, and let the chips fall where they may ­ as they say. The Gospel of the grace of God rests upon despair of all human resources. It is only when man's total depravity, and complete human impotency are  realized, that the full glory and power of the Gospel can be declared. Then only can it be that the sinner will cast himself unreservedly upon God, crying, "God be merciful to me a sinner" (Lk. 18:13).  Warnings against the errors of Arminianism which once used to thunder from so many pulpits of our land, are scarcely (make that, NEVER) heard today. With the exception of WBC, I know of none; and I speak as one who has been actively engaged in preaching for 65 years. Universal apostasy has set in, and is galloping rapidly to Armageddon. Same-sex marriage tolls the bell of American and worldwide DOOM. Only God's Elect have hope. Only their names have been written in the Lamb's Book of Life from before the foundation of the world. Beloved, I'm talking about a Book with many millions of names carefully inscribed; names of those from Adam to the end of time; names of those carefully and arbitrarily selected without any conditions whatsoever ­ truly and purely, UNCONDITIONAL ELECTION. Only those who find their names written there will go to Heaven; but ALL who find their names there will go to Heaven.  Isaac Watts wrote of that Book; to wit: "Chained to His throne, a volume lies, With all the fates of men, With ev'ry angel's form and size, Drawn by th' Eternal pen. My God, I would not long to see My fate with curious eyes, What gloomy lines are writ for me, Or what bright scenes may rise. In thy fair BOOK of life and grace, O may I find my name, Recorded in some humble place, Beneath my Lord the Lamb!"  Thomas Brooks wrote of that Book; to wit: "There is a Book of Life; Rev. 20:12. 'And another book was opened, which is the Book of Life.' The Book of Life is the book of all those that were elected and redeemed to life through Christ Jesus. This book of life contains a register of such particular persons in whose salvation God from all eternity determined to have His mercy glorified, and for whom Christ merited faith, repentance, and perseverance, that they should repent, believe, and be finally saved. The Book of Life shall be opened; that is to say The decrees of God will be then published and made known, which now are sealed up in His breast and locked up in His archives. Then it will be seen who are appointed to life for the glorifying of God's free, rich, and sovereign grace, and whom He purposed to leave in their sins, and to perish for ever, for the exaltation of his justice. It is called a Book of Life, not that God had need of a book, but to note the certainty of predestination ­ viz., that God knows all and every of the Elect, even as men know a thing which, for memory's sake, they set down in writing. This Book of Life shall be opened in the Great Day, because then it shall appear who were Elect,  Sunday, August 28, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  who Reprobates; who truly believed in Christ; who not; who worshipped God in spirit and  in truth; and who not; who walked with God as Noah, and who not; who set up God as the  object of their fear; and who not; who followed the Lamb withersoever he went, and who  not; who were sincere, and who not. Of this Book you read often in Scripture; Phil. 4:3; to wit: ,,And I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow, help those women which labored with me  in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers, whose names are in the Book of Life. Vorsitus thinks it a speech taken from the custom of soldiers or cities, in  which the soldiers or cities are by name written in a certain book or roll. This book or roll is called here ,,the book of life, because therein are written all the Elect who are ordained to eternal life: Rev. 3:5, ,,He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life. In this book of life all ,,the just that live by faith, are written. The elect are certain of eternal life, they shall never perish, nor none can ever pluck them out of the Father's hand, nor out of Christ's hand, Jn. 10:28-31.  GOD IS SAID TO HAVE BOOKS ONLY METAPHORICALLY; HE NEEDS NO BOOKS  TO HELP HIS MEMORY; He does all things by His infinite wisdom, eternal  foreknowledge, counsel, government, and judgment. But thus men cannot do; for  whatsoever is done in their councils, families, counties, states, courts, business contracts, etc., for FEEBLE MEMORY'S SAKE, is set down in writing, that so, as there is occasion,  they may look it over, and call to mind such things as they may desire, to refresh their memories ­ as they say. (The all-wise God, by use of an ANTHROPOPATHEIA speaks to  our feeble capacity; for He does all things without the help of books). NOTE: Not to have  our names blotted out of the Book of Life is the exact equivalent of having them always  remain therein; that is, TO ENJOY ETERNAL GLORY; AND, BELOVED, WHAT CAN  THE SOUL DESIRE MORE? The names of the Elect are written in the Book of Life. They  do not obtain salvation by chance, but were Elected by God to life and happiness before the  foundation of the world. Now their names, being once written in the Book of Life, they shall  never, never be blotted out of that Book. In the Book of Predestination there is not one blot to be found ­ the salvation of the Elect is most sure and certain: Rev. 13:8, ,,And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him ­ (i.e., the BEAST) ­ whose names are NOT written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. The  names of the Elect are said to be written in the Book of Life by a usual metaphor; for we  commonly write down the names for such as are dear unto us, that we may continually  remember them. So God, having in His eternal counsel Elected some to salvation, has written their names in the Book of Life; as our Savior tells us, ,,Rejoice, because your names are written in heaven, Lk. 10:20. Some say that to be written in the Book of Life  shows that they are heirs of glory; for we know that such are to inherit whose names are written in the Last Will and Testament of men."  And surely it is crystal clear that those who take the inheritance under a Will, may voluntarily take Unconditionally ­ or not at all. And, as we near the end of the Book of God, four passages enhance our study of the second point of the Five Points of Calvinism; to wit: UNCONDITIONAL ELECTION; to wit: Rev. 17:8; 20:15; 21:27; and, 22:19. "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition; and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, WHOSE NAMES WERE NOT WRITTEN IN THE BOOK OF LIFE FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is." (Rev. 17:8)  "AND WHOSOEVER WAS NOT FOUND WRITTEN IN THE BOOK OF LIFE WAS CAST INTO THE LAKE OF FIRE." (Rev. 20:15)  Sunday, August 28, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  "And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever  worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; BUT THEY WHICH ARE WRITTEN IN THE  LAMB'S BOOK OF LIFE." (Rev. 21:27)  "And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which are written in this Book." (Rev. 22:19)  God has decreed that a very few of mankind will be saved and go to Heaven; and that the overwhelming majority of mankind will be lost and spend eternity suffering in Hell. You can fluff up the language endlessly. But that fairly defines Unconditional Election, and Predestination, and fairly describes the Book of Life and the product of God's Everlasting Decrees. Call it Calvinism. Preach it, teach it, live it ­ and you're probably on your way to Heaven. Deny it and fight it ­ and you are probably on your way to Hell.  All of the ancient Confessions and Statements and Declarations of Faith are Calvinistic. Men like Charles G. Finney ­ trained and experienced in the law and theology ­ have tried to write a systematic Arminian theology ­ and have all failed. Finney even founded Oberlin College, near Cleveland, Ohio, which we picketed recently. They are rotten and perverted to their filthy, sodomitical, Arminian core. I tried to read lawyer Finney's so-called systematic books. It is impossible. But, see how The Westminster Confession of Faith refreshes the mind ­ for example; to wit: "God, from all eternity, did, by the most wise and holy counsel of His own will, freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass. God, before the foundation of the world was laid, according to His eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret council and good pleasure of His will hath chosen, in Christ, unto everlasting glory, out of His mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith or good works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the creature, as conditions, or causes moving Him thereunto; and all to the praise of His glorious grace." Beloved. THAT IS UNCONDITIONAL ELECTION.  The old Puritans practiced their Motion for Summary Judgment as before the Great King on the Great Day; to wit: "Most Holy and Blessed Lord, I have attached the original of the Book of Unconditional Election to my Motion for Summary Judgment. Now in the listings of the names of the blessed beneficiaries thereto, thou wilt find my humble name. Now, my name being written in that Book, I am exempt from all condemnation, and I have a vital interest in the Great Salvation. My name being written in that Book of Life, I am secured from coming into the judgment of reprobation or condemnation. Jesus Christ, who hath written my name in His Book of Life, hath settled all my accounts for me; He hath satisfied my justice, and pacified Thy wrath, and borne the curse, and purchased my pardon, and put upon me an everlasting righteousness; He has crossed out the black lines of my sins with the red lines of His blood; He has cancelled all the bonds wherein I stood obliged to divine justice. I do further plead, O blessed Lord, that there is an immutable connection betwixt being written in this Holy Book of Life and the actual obtaining of Eternal Life (!) and the actual granting of my humble, Motion for Summary Judgment. My dear and blessed Lord, there simply are no issues in this case to try, and no party with standing to try them if there were. This case, dear Lord, is ripe for summary judgment. Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died and rose again for me. Rom. 8:33."  I love you.  Amen.  
